The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Noble Lord, by Percival Wilde

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Noble Lord
       A Comedy in One Act

Author: Percival Wilde

Release Date: November 23, 2006 [EBook #19904]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NOBLE LORD ***




Produced by William Coon





THE NOBLE LORD
A Comedy In One Act

By
PERCIVAL WILDE

The Noble Lord

CHARACTERS
HE.
SHE.
PETERS.

THE NOBLE LORD

_A secluded spot in the Maine woods in the neighborhood of a
summer hotel. It is the middle of July. The trees are covered
with foliage, a hot sun casts dancing shadows upon the mossy
ground, and the air is full of the twittering of birds and the
rustle of leaves. A winding path crosses from one side to the
other, and near the center is a little clearing: the stump of a
felled tree, with the lichen-covered trunk itself near it, and a
patch of grassy turf. The eye cannot penetrate far through the
riotously growing underbrush, but as one looks upwards, to the
left, a thinning of foliage, allowing a glimpse of the sky, gives
evidence of the near proximity of some small body of water._

_As the curtain rises the scene is empty. There is only the song
of birds, and the whisper of a gentle breeze. For a few seconds
nothing else is heard. Then, suddenly, not far away, there is the
sound of a splash, followed by the scream of a drowning woman,
"Help! Help! Help!"  There is a tremendous crashing through the
underbrush, and another voice, very masculine, very English,
shouts, "Where are you? Where are you?" Rather indefinitely the
first speaker answers, "Here! Help! Help!"  Another crashing
through the underbrush, followed by a second splash, and
presently, after a short pause, there enters upon the stage a
tall, much bedraggled Englishman, bearing in his arms the
motionless body of an extremely good-looking girl. Both of them
are very wet, and a trail of water marks their progress across
the scene. Reaching the clearing, the Englishman methodically
deposits the girl on the ground, backs away a foot or so, and
notices that his hands are wet. He reaches into a hip pocket and
draws forth a handkerchief: the handkerchief is wetter than his
hands. With a gesture of vexation he throws it away, and gives
his attention to the girl. He looks at her quizzically; then,
rather timidly, he kneels at her side, and lays his ear over her
heart. He rises promptly with a satisfied nod, carefully removes
his dripping coat, folds it neatly, and places it on the log.
Again he kneels, this time with his knees on either side of the
girl's head, and laboriously begins to apply the Sylvester
method, counting audibly as he does so. At "ten" he stops
wearily, pauses, and again applies his ear to her heart. The
result is evidently pleasing, and after a few more Sylvester
movements, he begins to vary the procedure by removing her shoes
and alternately chafing her hands and feet. Presently she sighs
deeply. For the third time he pauses to listen to her heart.
Slowly and deliberately her left arm rises, to encircle his neck
in a confiding clasp. He sits back on his haunches, politely
surprised._

SHE. (_Faintly_) Mother! Mother, dear!

HE. Eh?

SHE. Mother, dear, I'm so glad----

HE. (_Interrupting energetically_) Really, I beg your pardon.

SHE. (_Continuing without a break_) I'm so glad you've come.

HE. Ah, yes. . . . Quite so.

SHE. Kiss me, mother.

HE. (_Trying to rise_) Eh?

(_She does not release him._)

SHE. Kiss me, mother.

HE. But I'm not your mother.

SHE. (_Plaintively_) Won't you kiss me, mother?

HE. (_Looks around furtively. Then he obliges her._)

SHE. Ah! That's so nice. (_She pauses. Shudders._) Hold me close,
mother, hold me close. I've had such a terrible dream!

HE. Good Heavens! You're not dreaming now. . . .

SHE. I dreamt--I dreamt-- (_He has raised her to a sitting
position. She stops abruptly. Looks about._) Where--where am I?

HE. (_Surprised_) Don't you know?

SHE. No.

HE. (_In a matter-of-fact tone_) We are about half a mile away
from the Poland Springs Hotel, Poland Springs, Maine.

SHE. (_Vaguely_) Oh! (_She pauses._) And you, how do you come
here?

HE. Strolling.

SHE. Strolling?

HE. I reached the hotel this morning. It was hot--beastly hot. I
went for a walk in the woods.

SHE. And then?

HE. I beg your pardon?

SHE. What happened then? How did we meet?

HE. Don't _you_ know?

SHE. I remember nothing--I'm confused. (_She tries to get up, but
sits on the log with a little exclamation._) My shoes--where are
my shoes?

HE. (_Fetching them_) Here they are.

SHE. Thank you. . . . (_She looks at them._) Those aren't my
shoes!

HE. (_Politely_) No?

SHE. They're wet.

HE. (_Nodding_) They would be.

SHE. But they're not mine.

HE. (_Shrugging his shoulders_) I found them on your feet.

SHE. (_Confused_) On my feet?

HE. Yes. . . . (_An afterthought_) One on each.

SHE. Oh! . . . (_She tries to put them on._) I can't get them on.

HE. No?

SHE. Will you help me? (_He assists her; she feels her clothes
and exclaims_): Oh!

HE. Did I hurt you?

SHE. (_Astonished_) My clothes are wet!

HE. (_Thoughtfully_) Yes.

SHE. How funny! (_Noticing him._) And you--you're wet also!

HE. (_Nodding_) Soaked.

SHE. What a coincidence! How curious! How did it happen? (_She
pauses._) Oh, if I could only think! Think! (_He rises, and waits
politely._) Tell me: you must know.

HE. Well, I was strolling through the woods. I heard a splash

SHE. (_Interrupting_) A splash! Oh, don't say any more: I
remember! That horrible lake! Horrible! It was so warm at the
hotel: I had gone off to the woods. I was sitting at the edge of
the lake--on a rock--reading. I must have been sleepy. I fell in.

HE. Then you screamed.

SHE. Yes: I was drowning! Drowning! I called for help!

HE. I heard you.

SHE. I sank--I sank, oh, miles and miles! It felt as if hands
were trying to pull me down to the bottom! I screamed again--and
then--then--I felt a strong arm around my waist--I was dizzy--
there was a roaring in my ears--I knew no more.

HE. (_Sympathetically_) Too bad, too bad.

SHE. And you--(_rising to her feet enthusiastically_)--you were
the man who jumped in!

HE. (_Apologetically_) I was passing by.

SHE. You saved my life! Oh, how can I ever thank you? My hero!
(_She throws her arms about his neck._)

HE. That's all right. . . .

SHE. But it's not all right. I can never repay you! Never! Never!
Not if I live to be a thousand years old! (_She kisses him._)

HE. (_Calmly_) That's the second time.

SHE. The second time?

HE. (_Nodding_) I kissed you before.

SHE. Oh! (_Releasing him quickly._) You didn't!

HE. Yes, I did.

SHE. While I was unconscious?

HE. Precisely.

SHE. Oh, how _could_ you do such a thing? How could you?

HE. (_Taking up his coat_) It was by request. (_Takes cigarette
case from pocket._)

SHE. (_Incredulously_) I asked you?

HE. You said, "Mother! Mother! Kiss me!" (_Takes cigarette from
case. Pleased to see that it is dry. Puts it between his lips._)

SHE. I said _that?_

HE. They were your first words. (_Produces match-safe from
trouser pocket._)

SHE. But you didn't have to kiss me.

HE. No? (_Trying to strike a match. It is wet. So are the
others._)

SHE. You didn't have to!

HE. I tried to explain that I was not your mother, but you seemed
to know better. (_He throws the cigarette away._) You insisted. I
couldn't help it.

SHE. (_After a pause, coquettishly_) What do you mean: you
couldn't "help it"?

HE. (_Perfectly willing to flirt_) You know--(_He hesitates._)

SHE. (_Encouragingly_) Yes?

HE. You're a pretty girl--a deucedly pretty girl.

SHE. Oh, no!

HE. But you are; honor bright!

SHE. You really think so?

HE. (_Nods_) There was no one around. It was the kind of an
opportunity which does not present itself every day: life is so--
monotonous. And you didn't seem to object.

SHE. (_Coyly_) I couldn't very well--not while I was unconscious.

HE. That's so. I am a man, with a man's tastes. And you begged me
so hard--it was so inviting--well, I kissed you.

SHE. (_After a pause_) On the lips?

HE. Yes. On the lips.

SHE. (_After a pause_) How often?

HE. Eh?

SHE. How often did you kiss me?

HE. Only once.

SHE. Was that all?

HE. (_With a smile_) Why, it's hardly worth mentioning.

SHE. (_Going to him and taking his hands magnanimously_) Well, I
forgive you.

HE. Thank you.

SHE. (_Invitingly_) Two kisses is not a great deal for saving my
life.

HE. No?

SHE. I owe you much more than that!

HE. (_Standing motionless_) Really?

SHE. (_With her lips half an inch from his_) Really! (_A pause._)
Really! (_He does not kiss her. She gives it up. Sits on the log,
drawing him to her side._) You must tell me all about yourself.
Just think: if it hadn't been for you, I would be at the bottom
of the lake now. What a horrible tragedy that would have been: to
die in such a way! . . . (_She pauses._) It's natural that I
should want to know something about the man who saved me from
that. . . .

HE. (_With embarrassment_) I don't like to talk about myself----

SHE. (_Interrupting encouragingly_) You're still a young man,
aren't you?

HE. Thirty-one.

SHE. (_Laying her hand on his_) Are you?

HE. (_Nodding_) Last November.

SHE. (_Lying with the insouciance of expertness_) I'm just
twenty. (_He nods his head, without showing the least sign of
disbelief._) Eleven years between us.

HE. Just the right ages, aren't we?

SHE. (_Leaving her hand where it is_) Do you think so?

HE. Eleven years difference--ideal!

SHE. Ten and a half.

HE. Eh?

SHE. I was born in June.

HE. Oh, were you? (_Sagely._) That's better yet.

SHE. Do you think so--Lord Brookfield?

HE. (_Surprised--or simulating it effectively._) Eh?

SHE. Lord Brookfield?

HE. How on earth did you know it?

SHE. (_With a laugh_) Oh, I am not so stupid as all that!

HE. You recognized me?

SHE. No. I have never seen you.

HE. A photo?

SHE. No.

HE. Then how did you know? . . .

SHE. (_Interrupting_) Lord Brookfield is a well-known man. The
papers said he was coming to the hotel. I knew every other
guest----

HE. But three or four others arrived this morning.

SHE. Americans.

HE. Oh!

SHE. You are English. I could see that right away.

HE. (_After a pause_) How clever of you!

SHE. Oh, Lord Brookfield!

HE. And how curious that I should meet you in this way--informal,
so to speak.

SHE. (_Laughing_) Odd, wasn't it? (_She rises._) Ugh!--how my
clothes are sticking to me!

HE. That's so. You had better change.

SHE. And you?

HE. I'm rather wet myself.

SHE. Will you take me back to the hotel?

HE. The sun is very hot here.

SHE. (_Instantly changing_) Oh, would you rather stay?

HE. (_Does not answer for a few seconds. Then, a little
abruptly_) Tell me: can you swim?

SHE. (_Startled_) Eh?

HE. Can you swim?

SHE. Lord Brookfield! Of course I can't!

HE. That's curious.

SHE. Curious?

HE. Neither can I.

SHE. (_Staggered, but returning to the attack with magnificent
self-possession_) Oh, but you swam splendidly! Clothes and all!
All the way from the other side of the lake!

HE. Did I?

SHE. Of course you did! One plunge, and a few magnificent
overhand strokes. . . . (_She notices his peculiar expression,
and hesitates._)

HE. (_Thoughtfully_) Plunge?

SHE. Why, certainly.

HE. (_Shaking his head_) I would have sworn I waded.

SHE. (_Laughing uneasily_) You are really too modest, Lord
Brookfield.

HE. Let's see. (_He picks up his coat, and shakes it out._) Of
course, I might have swum, but--Ah! the water line comes only as
far as the waist!

SHE. That means nothing.

HE. No? (_Feeling his head._) If I had plunged, my hair would
have been wet.

SHE. It dried in the sun.

HE. Ah, yes! But my cigarettes! (_Taking one from the case._)

SHE. The case is waterproof.

HE. Still, the matches are wet. (_Producing the box from his
trouser pocket, and trying to strike one._) You see?

SHE. (_With a forced laugh_) Lord Brookfield, don't deny that you
saved my life!

HE. That is what I am trying to do.

SHE. (_Frigidly_) I beg your pardon?

HE. I jumped in without thinking. It was the natural thing to do:
I heard you scream for help. But the moment the water came to my
waist I knew that if it went any deeper I should have to call for
help also.

SHE. Well?

HE. I was spared that humiliation: the pond isn't over three feet
deep in any place. And I waded the whole twenty feet from one end
to the other. . . . And I _can't_ swim.

SHE. But I was drowning! Drowning!

HE. (_Politely_) Are you in the habit of drowning often?

SHE. (_Rising indignantly_) Lord Brookfield!

HE. I nearly forgot to mention----

SHE. What?

HE. That I saw you jump in.

SHE. Oh!

HE. It was pleasant while it lasted, wasn't it? And romantic!
Why, romantic doesn't begin to describe it! (_Imitating_)
"Mother, kiss me!"

SHE. Oh, how can you?

HE. Unconscious--helpless--and you didn't remember! Not even the
shoes. That was clever--very clever! And the hands trying to pull
you down to the bottom: that was the touch of genius! (_He pauses
with a smile._) Ah, well, I was willing to have a little fun. (_A
man is heard whistling a popular song in the distance. He listens
attentively._)

SHE. (_After a pause_) You played with me--played with me. Oh,
you're disgusting! Revolting! What a thing for a _man_ to do! I
thought---- (_She breaks off._)

HE. (_Encouraging her to continue_) Yes?

SHE. Nothing. . . . (_Then, seeing no reason to restrain
herself._) I thought Lord Brookfield was a gentleman!

HE. Oh, but _I'm_ not.

SHE. Not a gentleman?

HE. No. . . . I'm not Lord Brookfield.

SHE. _Not_ Lord Brookfield?

HE. No.

SHE. Then who on earth are you?

HE. (_Sweetly_) I? I'm a friend of his.

SHE. A friend?

HE. A close friend--very close.

SHE. Who? Who?

HE. (_Leisurely_) I'm not related, you know, but I see a lot of
him. We're thick--very thick.

SHE. (_un patiently_) Who are you?

HE. (_Simply_) I'm his valet.

SHE. (_Horrified_) Oh! . . . And you kissed me! A valet! You
dared kiss me!

HE. At your request.

SHE. (_Almost choking with rage_) But a valet! A valet!

HE. I'm a good valet. One of the best there is.

SHE. Your insolence! Oh! (_She seizes the handkerchief which he
has left on the log, and wipes her mouth furiously._)

HE. My handkerchief.

SHE. (_Throwing it to the ground_) Oh, you coward! You. . . . You
(_She sits on the log, inarticulate with rage. The whistle is
heard again._)

HE. Listen to me.

SHE. I won't.

HE. (_Earnestly_) Listen to me.

SHE. I don't want to talk to you!

HE. I'll help you.

SHE. (_Rising_) I don't want your help.

HE. (_Bluntly_) Then you're silly.

SHE. (_Wheeling furiously_) How dare you----

HE. (_Interrupting_) I'll make a bargain with you.

SHE. (_Scornfully_) What dealings can there be between us?

HE. Did you hear the whistling a minute ago?

SHE. Well?

HE. (_With meaning_) That's Brookfield.

SHE. (_After a pause_) Well?

HE. The path leads here. He is following the path----

SHE. (_After still another pause_) Well?

HE. You and I might be very good friends----

SHE. (_Thoughtfully_) Oh, you mean----

HE. A valet is not paid very well----

SHE. No. . . . Still----

SHE. If anything comes of it----

SHE. (_Slowly_) Comes of what?

HE. You understand me. (_He pauses; smiles. Then, in a
Mephistophelian manner_): Your clothes are still wet, aren't
they?

SHE. (_With full comprehension_) Yes----

HE. Enough said! (_The whistle is heard, close at hand._) Quick!

SHE. (_Going off_) You won't tell? (_He shakes his head._) I'll
remember you. (_She runs into the woods._)

HE. (_Sits on the log, laughs heartily. He produces another
cigarette, and tries in vain to light it. Then, as an atrocious
little cockney enters whistling gaily, he addresses him sharply_)
Peters!

PETERS. (_Surprised_) M'lord?

HE. Give me a light, Peters.

PETERS. Yes, m'lord. (_Produces match, etc._)

HE. Thanks. (_He blows a few whiffs into the air. Then stops, and
surveys PETERS thoughtfully._) Peters, you're a brave man, aren't
you?

PETERS. (_Modestly_) I am 'andy with me fists, m'lord.

HE. That's not quite what I mean, Peters. . . . (_He pauses._)
Peters, you have the making of a hero in you. Something tells me
that you're going to have your chance.

(_There is a loud splash from the same direction as before,
followed by screams of "Help! Help!"_)

PETERS. (_With excitement_) M'lord!

HE. (_Quietly_) Yes, Peters?

PETERS. Somebody's calling for 'elp, m'lord!

HE. Yes, Peters.

PETERS. Shall I go, m'lord?

HE. Yes, Peters. . . . Gallop!

_And as_

PETERS. (_Charges wildly into the shrubbery, shouting_):  H'I'm
coming! H'I'm coming!

THE CURTAIN FALLS





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Noble Lord, by Percival Wilde

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NOBLE LORD ***

***** This file should be named 19904.txt or 19904.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/9/9/0/19904/

Produced by William Coon

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
