The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Yotsuya Kwaidan or O'Iwa Inari, by 
James S. De Benneville

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Yotsuya Kwaidan or O'Iwa Inari
       Tales of the Tokugawa, Volume 1 (of 2)

Author: James S. De Benneville

Release Date: November 28, 2006 [EBook #19944]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE YOTSUYA KWAIDAN OR O'IWA INARI ***




Produced by Clare Boothby and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





       *       *       *       *       *

  +------------------------------------------------------------+
  | TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES                                        |
  |                                                            |
  | Accents and diacritical marks have generally been          |
  | standardised. Where there is a single instance of a word   |
  | with an accent, and one without, no change has been made   |
  | to the original. (e.g. momme/mommé; murashite/murashité;   |
  | Kuramae/Kuramaé).                                          |
  |                                                            |
  | The letter o with a macron is represented as o[u].         |
  | The letter u with a macron is represented as u[u].         |
  |                                                            |
  | Kanji characters in the original book are shown            |
  | enclosed in square brackets: for example, [kami].          |
  |                                                            |
  | The italicisation of Japanese words has been standardised. |
  |                                                            |
  | Punctuation and obvious printer's errors have been         |
  | corrected.                                                 |
  |                                                            |
  | Hyphenation and capitalisation has been standardised.      |
  |                                                            |
  | The symbol referred to in footnote 44, an X with a bar     |
  | across the top, has been represented as [=X].              |
  |                                                            |
  | Superscript numbers in square brackets are represented     |
  | as ^{[4]}.                                                 |
  |                                                            |
  | Punctuation and obvious printer's errors have been         |
  | corrected. For a complete list, please see the bottom      |
  | of this document.                                          |
  |                                                            |
  +------------------------------------------------------------+

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]




LEGEND.


The outline of the map is that found in Volume I. of the Edo Sunago,
published Keio 2nd year (1866). The detail of district maps found in the
book is worked in, together with that from the sectional map of Edo
published Ansei 4th year (1857), and from the Go Edo Zusetsu Shu[u]ran
published Kaei 6th year (1853). The map therefore shows in rough outline
the state of the city just before the removal of the capital from
Kyo[u]to; the distribution of the castes.

The Pre-Tokugawa villages (Eiroku: 1558-1569) indicated on the map found
in the "Shu[u]ran" are:--

North and South Shinagawa: Meguro-Motomura: Gin-Mitamura: Mitamura:
O[u]nemura: Upper and Lower Shibuya: Harajuku-mura: Kokubunji: Azabu:
Kawaza Ichi: O[u]zawa-mura: Imai-mura: Sendagaya: Yamanaka-mura:
Ichigaya: Ushigome: Kobiko-mura: Upper and Lower Hirakawa-mura: Ochiya:
Sekihon: Ikebukuroya: Tomizaka-mura: Ishibukero-mura: Tanibaragaike:
Neruma-mura: Okurikyo[u]: Nakarai-mura: Koishikawa: Zoshigayatsu:
O[u]ji: Shimura: Takinogawa: Kinsoboku-mura: Harajuku-mura (II.):
Komegome-mura: Taninaka-mura: Shimbori-mura: Mikawajima-mura:
Ashigahara-mura: Haratsuka: Ishihama-mura: Senju[u]-mura: Suda-mura:
Sumidagawa: Yanagijima: Jujo[u]-mura; Itabashi: Sugamo-mura: Arakawa
(river): Kandagawa pool (_ike_); Kanda-mura: Shibasaki-mura:
Shin-Horima-mura: Yushima-mura: Shitaya-mura: Torigoe-mura:
Shirosawa-mura: Asakusa-mura: Harai-mura: Some-Ushigome: Ishiwara:
Kinoshitagawa: Ubagaike (pool): Negishi-mura: Kinsoki-mura: Kameido-mura
(near Ueno): Shinobazu-ike (pool).

From South to North circling by the West.

Shinagawa: Mita-mura: Takanawa: Near Imai-mura is a Myo[u]jin shrine,
close by the mouth of the present Akabane river.

Ikura: Hibiya: Tsukiji: Tsukuda: Tame-ike (pool): Tsukuda Myo[u]jin:
Ota's castle: Sanke-in: Hirakawa-mura: Sakurada-mura: Honju[u]-mura:
O[u]tamage-ike: Kametaka-mura. To the East.

77 villages, total.

Pronounce as in Italian, giving vowels full value: ch- as in "church."

THE YOTSUYA KWAIDAN

OR

O'IWA INARI

_BY THIS AUTHOR_

  SAKURAMBO[U]
  (THE FRUIT OF THE TREE)

  Travel notes on thoughts and things Japanese, experienced
  during a four years' sojourn in the country

  Octavo. 339 pages.


  MORE JAPONICO

  A critique of the effect of an idea--communityism--on
  the life and history of a people

  Octavo. VI, 594 pages.


  SAITO[U] MUSASHI-BO[U] BENKEI
  (TALES OF THE WARS OF THE GEMPEI)

  Being the story of the lives and adventures of
  Iyo-no-Kami Minamoto Kuro[u] Yoshitsune and Saito[u]
  Musashi-Bo[u] Benkei the Warrior Monk

  Octavo. 2 Vols., XXI, 841 pages, with 69 full page
  illustrations (frontispieces in color) and
  three maps.


  OGURI HANGWAN ICHIDAIKI
  (TALES OF THE SAMURAI)

  Being the story of the lives, the adventures, and the
  mis-adventures of the Hangwan-dai Kojiro[u] Sukéshigé
  and Ternte-hime, his wife

  Octavo. XV, 485 pages, with 45 full page illustrations
  (frontispiece in color) and three maps.

[Illustration: THE O'IWA OF THE TAMIYA INARI JINJA OF ECHIZENBORI,
TOKYO]

_TALES OF THE TOKUGAWA_

THE YOTSUYA KWAIDAN

OR

O'IWA INARI

RETOLD FROM THE JAPANESE ORIGINALS BY JAMES S. DE BENNEVILLE

  "The mainspring of human existence
  is love (_nasaké_), for others or--oneself."
                      --SEISHIN

PRESS OF J.B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY PHILADELPHIA, U.S.A. 1917

COPYRIGHT, 1917, BY JAMES SEGUIN DE BENNEVILLE

PRINTED AND COPYRIGHTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




PREFACE


Tales of the Tokugawa can well be introduced by two "wonder-stories" of
Nippon. One of these, the Yotsuya Kwaidan,[1] is presented in the
present volume, not so much because of the incidents involved and the
peculiar relation to a phase of Nipponese mentality, as from the fact
that it contains all the machinery of the Nipponese ghost story. From
this point of view the reading of one of these tales disposes of a whole
class of the native literature. Difference of detail is found. But
unless the tale carries some particular interest, as of curious
illustration of customs or history--the excuse for a second
presentation--a long course of such reading becomes more than
monotonous. It is unprofitable. Curiously enough, it can be said that
most Nipponese ghost stories are true. When a sword is found enshrined,
itself the malevolent influence--as is the Muramasa blade of the
Hamamatsu Suwa Jinja, the subject of the Komatsu Onryu[u] of
Matsubayashi Hakuchi--and with such tradition attached to it, it is
difficult to deny a basis of fact attaching to the tradition. The ghost
story becomes merely an elaboration of an event that powerfully
impressed the men of the day and place. Moreover this naturalistic
element can be detected in the stories themselves. Nipponese writers of
to-day explain most of them by the word _shinkei_--"nerves"; the working
of a guilty conscience moulding succeeding events, and interpreting the
results to the subsequent disaster involved. The explanation is somewhat
at variance with the native Shinto[u] doctrine of the moral perfection
of the Nipponese, and its maxim--follow the dictates of one's heart; but
that is not our present concern.

Their theory, however, finds powerful support in the nature of the
Nipponese ghost. The Buddhist ghost does not remain on earth. It has its
travels and penalties to go through in the nether world, or its
residence in Paradise, before it begins a new life--somewhere. The
Shinto[u] ghost, in the vagueness of Shinto[u] theology, does remain on
earth. If of enough importance it is enshrined, and rarely goes abroad,
except when carried in procession at the time of the temple festival.
Otherwise it finds its home in the miniature shrine of the _kami-dana_
or god-shelf. There is a curious confusion of Nipponese thought on this
subject; at least among the mass of laity. At the Bon-Matsuri the dead
revisit the scene of their earthly sojourn for the space of three days;
and yet the worship of the _ihai_, or mortuary tablets, the food
offerings with ringing of the bell to call the attention of the resident
Spirit is a daily rite at the household Buddhist shrine (Butsudan).
When, therefore, the ghost does not conform to these well-regulated
habits, it is because it is an unhappy ghost. It is then the _O'Baké_ or
_Bakémono_, the haunting ghost. Either it has become an unworshipped
spirit, or, owing to some atrocious injury in life, it stays to wander
the earth, and to secure vengeance on the living perpetrator. In most
cases this is effected by the grudge felt or spoken at the last moment
of life. The mind, concentrated in its hate and malice at this final
crisis, secures to the Spirit a continued and unhappy sojourn among the
living, until the vengeance be secured, the grudge satisfied, and the
Spirit pacified. There are other unhappy conditions of this revisiting
of life's scenes; as when the dead mother returns to nurse her infant,
or the dead mistress to console a lover. In the latter case, at least,
the expressed affection has a malignant effect, perhaps purpose--as in
the Bo[u]tan Do[u]ro[u] of Sanyu[u]tei Encho[u], a writer most careful
in observing all the niceties called for by the subject.

In the Nipponese ghost story the vengeful power of the ghost acts
through entirely natural means. The characters involved suffer through
their own delusions aroused by conscience. In the old days, and among
the common people in Nippon to-day, the supernatural was and is believed
in, with but few exceptions. Such stories still are held to be fact,
albeit the explanation is modern. Hence it can be said that the "Yotsuya
Kwaidan" is a true story. O'Iwa, the Lady of Tamiya, really did exist in
the Genroku and Ho[u]rei periods (1688-1710); just ante-dating the
reforming rule of the eighth Tokugawa Sho[u]gun, Yoshimune Ko[u]. Victim
of an atrocious plot of her husband and others, she committed suicide
with the vow to visit her rage upon all engaged in the conspiracy. The
shrine of the O'Iwa Inari (Fox-witched O'Iwa) in Yotsuya was early
erected (1717) to propitiate her wrathful ghost; and the shrines of
Nippon, to the shabbiest and meanest, have their definite record. On the
register the name of the husband appears as Ibei; "probably correct," as
Mr. Momogawa tells us. With him the name of Iémon is retained in the
present story. Iémon is the classic example of the wicked and brutal
husband, on the stage and in the _gidayu_ recitation of Nippon. There
was but little reason to revert to the record. The shrine always
prospered. It appears on the maps of the district as late as Ansei
fourth year (1857); and the writer has had described to him by a friend
a visit to this shrine some twenty years ago. The lady in question
referred to it rather vaguely as beyond Samegafuchi: _i.e._, at Yotsuya
Samoncho[u]. It was particularly favoured by the hair dressers, and to
the eyes of a young girl was a gorgeous structure in its continually
renewed decoration. Inquiry of late in the district elicited the
information that the shrine had been removed. Many changes have been
made on the southern side of Yotsuya by the passage of the railway from
Iidamachi to Shinjuku. The Myo[u]gyo[u]ji, with other temples there
located, has been swept away. In fact the Meiji period handled all those
institutions established by deceased piety with great roughness.
Teramachi--Temple Street--is now but a name. The temples of eastern
Yotsuya have nearly all disappeared. Have public institutions occupied
this "public land"? Of course: the sites were sold for the secular
purpose of profit, and poverty spread wide and fast over them. Yotsuya
got the shell of this oyster.

About the middle of Meiji therefore (say 1893) the shrine disappeared
from Yotsuya Samoncho[u]; to be re-erected in Echizenbori near the
Sumidagawa. Local inquiry could or would give but little information. A
fortunate encounter at the Denzu-In with an University student, likewise
bent on hunting out the old sites of Edo's history, set matters right.
Subsequent visits to the newer shrine were not uninteresting, though the
presence of the mirror of O'Iwa and of the bamboo tube inclosing her
Spirit (Mr. Momogawa) was strenuously denied by the incumbent. In the
presence of the very genuine worship at the lady's shrine much stress
need not be laid on the absence.

The present story practically is based on the "Yotsuya Kwaidan" of
Shunkintei Ryuo[u], a famous story-teller of the Yoshiwara, and an old
man when the "Restoration" of the Meiji period occurred. The sketch
given in the "O'Iwa Inari Yu[u]rei" of Momogawa Jakuen filled in gaps,
and gave much suggestion in moulding the story into a consistent whole.
Parts merely sketched by the older story-teller found completeness. This
collection of ghost stories--the "Kwaidan Hyaku Monogatari" published by
the Kokkwado[u]--is in the main written by Mr. Momogawa, and can be
recommended as one of the best of these collections, covering in shorter
form the more important stories of this class of the native literature.
The "Yotsuya Kwaidan" of Shinsai To[u]yo[u], one of the older and
livelier of the _ko[u]dan_ lecturers, gives the scene at the house of
Cho[u]bei, and his quarrel with Toémon. It is found in the
"Kwaidan-Shu[u]" published by the Hakubun-kwan. The _gidayu_ (heroic
recitation) and the drama handle all these stories for their own
peculiar purposes. The incidents of a tale are so distorted, for stage
use and dramatic effect, as to make these literary forms of small avail.
The letter of O'Hana, however, is practically that of the play of
Tsuruya Namboku (Katsu Byo[u]zo[u]). It has been thought well to append
to the story the _gidayu_ of this writer, covering the scene in Iémon's
house. Also the strange experience of the famous actor Kikugoro[u],
third of that name, is put into English for the curious reader.
Kikugoro[u] was the pioneer in the representation of the Namboku drama.

This life history of the O'Iwa Inari--the moving cause of the
establishment of her shrine--is no mere ghost story. It is a very
curious exposition of life in Edo among a class of officials entirely
different from the fighting _samurai_ who haunted the fencing schools of
Edo; from the men higher up in social status, who risked heads, or
rather bellies, in the politics of the day and the struggle to obtain
position, which meant power, in the palace clique. These latter were men
who sought to have a share in the government of the Sho[u]gun's person,
and hence of the nation. They strove to seat themselves in the high
posts of the palace. Here was a rapidly revolving wheel to which a man
must cling, or be dashed to pieces. To prevent being shoved off into
destruction they used every means of slander and intrigue, and fought
against such, that the life of a rich and luxurious court afforded. The
result, too often, was the present of a dagger from the suzerain they
sought to please. Trapped into some breach of the harsh discipline, or
even of mere form of etiquette, the gift was "respectfully received"
with the mocking face of gratitude, even from the hand of the successful
rival in office. At his home the defeated politician cut his belly open.
His obedience to the suzerain's will was duly reported. His family was
ruined or reprieved according to a capricious estimation of its power of
resentment--and it became a question of "who next?" to try for a place
on the wheel. On the contrary those lower officials,[2] engaged in the
dull routine of bureaucratic office, had a much less dangerous service
and etiquette to deal with. In insignificant ease they lived and
intrigued in their petty way, under no obligation to take sides in the
politics of the truly great. If they fell, it was largely their own
fault. Such was the position of those in immediate contact with the
working wheels of the Sho[u]gun's Government. The great _bugyo[u]_
(magistrates) were continually shifting. Their court staff was the solid
foundation of unyielding precedent in form. The one was a court officer;
the others court officers.

Hence the Kwaidan possesses value for the social lesson it conveys. The
admittance of a stranger to the ward, his evil bond with the Lady of
Tamiya, the previous passion for O'Hana and thereby the entanglement of
Kwaiba in the plot; all form a network in which the horror of the story
is balanced by the useful lessons to be drawn by the mind of Nippon from
its wickedness. Perhaps this belief in the effect of the curse of the
suicide acts both in deterring or bringing back the erring husband, and
in saving the wife from the extremities of her despair in abandonment.
The story of O'Iwa, the belief in her power, to-day has a strong
influence on a certain class of the Nipponese mind; especially among the
women. If the present writer might have felt momentarily an amused
feeling at sight of her worshippers, it was quickly lost at sight of the
positive unhappiness expressed in these faces of the abandoned. A visit
to the Tamiya Inari is not necessarily either one of idle curiosity or
without results. Some exceedingly painful impressions can be brought
away in the mind.

It is not entirely in jest therefore that apology is made for the
reproduction of the story. It is well in such matters to follow one's
predecessors. Moreover, public sentiment is not to be derided nor
disregarded. It has a certain title to respect, even when superstition
is involved. Hence the statement can be made, that in telling this story
of the "Yotsuya Kwaidan" no derogatory motive is involved--to people,
class, or person; least of all in reference to the dread Lady of Tamiya.

OMARUDANI--4th July, 1916.




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER.                                                             PAGE

         PROEM                                                           15
      I. O'MINO AND DENSUKÉ                                              17
     II. KAWAI SAN OF KANDA KU                                           28
    III. TAKAHASHI DAIHACHIRO[U]                                         35
     IV. THE APPEARANCE OF O'IWA SAN                                     43
      V. THE AFFAIR OF THE SHIBA KIRIDO[U]SHI                            49
     VI. NEGOTIATIONS: THE BUSINESS OF A NAKO[U]DO OR MARRIAGE BROKER    63
    VII. IÉMON APPEARS                                                   74
   VIII. IF OLD ACQUAINTANCE BE FORGOT                                   86
     IX. LOVE KNOTS                                                      93
      X. THE PLOT AGAINST O'IWA                                          99
     XI. THE PLOT DEVELOPS                                              106
    XII. KWAIBA'S REVENGE                                               114
   XIII. THE YO[U]TAKA (NIGHT-HAWKS) OF HONJO[U]                        123
    XIV. THE PUNISHMENT                                                 131
     XV. CHO[U]BEI GETS THE NEWS                                        141
    XVI. NEWS REACHES KWAIBA                                            155
   XVII. NEWS OF KWAIBA                                                 162
  XVIII. IN THE SHADOW OF THE GO INKYO[U]                               173
    XIX. TAMIYA YOÉMON: WITH NEWS OF KONDO[U] ROKURO[U]BEI AND
         MYO[U]ZEN THE PRIEST                                           180
     XX. KIBEI DONO                                                     195
    XXI. MATTERS ECCLESIASTICAL                                         212
   XXII. THE RITES FOR O'IWA                                            222
  XXIII. THE SANZUGAWA, BRIDGELESS; THE FLOWERLESS ROAD TRAVERSED
         BY THE DEAD                                                    233
         APPENDICES                                                     251

[The pronunciation of the Japanese vowels and consonants follows closely
the Italian; in diphthongs and triphthongs each vowel is given full
value.

a = a as in father, e = a as in mate, i = e as in meet, o = o as in
soap, u = oo as in fool.

g is always hard. In the To[u]kyo[u] district it has the sound ng.

ch has full value, as in church. It is _not_ k; c is only found as ch;
_i.e._ cha, chi, cho, chu.

The vowels also have long (continued) sounds, marked by the accent -.

At times a vowel is elided; or rather but faintly touched by the voice.
Thus Sukéshigé is pronounced Skéshigé; Sukénaga = Skénaga; Kuranosuké =
Kuranoské. _Bu_ and _mu_ at the end of word lose the vowel
sound--Shikibu = Shikib.

Kami used in connection with a man means "lord," Wakasa no Kami = Lord
of Wakasa province.

Reprinted from the "Oguri Hangwan."]

(Kami also means "God" or divinized person; including the spirits of
the dead. Even a living man can be regarded as a _kami_, in cases of
some very unusual service rendered to the public welfare. Professor Imai
recently--at Karuizawa--called attention to the fact that originally
_kami_ was written [kami], _i.e._ "superior." The divine attribute
[kami] was introduced with Buddhism.)




PROEM


Reader, pray take not the story of the O'Iwa Inari, the Yotsuya
Kwaidan, as a mere fairy tale or novel of the day. The shrine of the
Tamiya Inari stands now to attest the truth of the tradition. Let the
doubter but witness the faith of the believer in the powers of the
fearful lady; and, if doubt still continues to exist, the salutary fear
of others at least will inspire respect.

THE YOTSUYA KWAIDAN OR O'IWA INARI




CHAPTER I

O'MINO AND DENSUKÉ


Yotsuya is a suburb--at the extreme west of Edo-To[u]kyo[u]. Its
streets are narrow and winding, though hilly withal; especially on the
southern edge toward the Aoyama district, still devoted to cemeteries
and palaces, sepulchres whited without and within. Echizenbori would be
at the other extremity of the great city. It fronts eastward on the bank
of the Sumidagawa. The populous and now poverty stricken districts of
Honjo[u] and Fukagawa beyond the wide stream, with other qualities,
deprive it of any claim of going to extremes. In fact Echizenbori is a
very staid and solid section of Edo-To[u]kyo[u]. Its streets are narrow;
and many are the small shops to purvey for the daily needs of its
inhabitants. But these rows of shops are sandwiched in between great
clumps of stores, partly warehouses and partly residences of the owners
thereof. These stores line the canals of Echizenbori, water courses
crowded with junks carrying their ten tons, or their hundreds of tons,
of freight--precious cargoes of rice to go into these stores in bulk, of
_shoyu_ (soy) by the hundred kegs, of sakarazumi (charcoal from Shimosa)
by the thousand _tawara_ (bale), of fish dried and fresh, of _takuan_ or
_daikon_ (the huge white radish) pickled in salt and rice bran, of all
the odds and ends of material in the gross which go to make up the
necessities of living in a great city. If Echizenbori then can make its
show of poverty, and very little _display_ of wealth, it is not one of
the poor quarters of this capital city of Nippon.

Crossing the Takabashi from Hacho[u]bori and plunging down the narrow
street opposite; a short turn to the right, a plunge down another narrow
street and a turn to the right; one comes to the high cement wall, in
its modernness of type a most unusual attachment to shrine or temple.
The gate is narrow and formal; almost like the entrance to a garden or
smaller burying ground. Within all is changed from the busy outside
world. The area inclosed is small--perhaps a square of a hundred and
fifty feet--but marked in lines by a maze of lanterns of the cheap iron
variety, set on cheap wooden posts. On the right is seen a minor shrine
or two dedicated to the Inari goddess. On the left is a small building
devoted to votive offerings, the crude and the more elaborate. The most
striking is the offering of a little _geisha_ lady, and portrays an
heroic scene of early days. There are other portraitures, in which
perhaps a wandering lover is seen as a hero, to the lady's eyes, of
these later times. On the outside of the structure are posted up by the
hundred pictures of once woebegone ladies, now rejoicing in the potent
influence of the Tamiya shrine to restore to them the strayed affections
of husband or lover. Next in line is an open, shed-like structure. It is
a poor chance if here the casual visitor does not encounter one or two
of the petitioners, patiently trotting round in a circle from front to
back, and reciting their prayers in this accomplishment of "the hundred
turns." Just opposite, and close by, is the shrine itself. This is in
part a massive store-house set back in the domestic structure, with the
shrine of the Inari facing the visitor. The floor space at the sides and
before it often is piled high with tubs of _shoyu_ and _saké_, with
bundles of charcoal, such negotiable articles as the wealthier
shopkeeper can offer to the mighty lady; and long tresses of hair of
women too poor to offer anything else, or wise enough to know that a
woman could make no greater sacrifice. And is not the object of their
worship a woman? Numerous are these severed strands. Entering the shrine
and passing the pleasant spoken warden at its entrance, peddling his
charms and giving advice where often it is sadly needed--perhaps the
more valuable of his two public duties--to the left within is the
Oku-no-In, the inner shrine containing the _ihai_ or memorial tablet of
O'Iwa. That the shrine is popular and wealthy; that the lady is feared,
venerated, and her dreadful powers much sought after; this is plain to
the eye in the crowded elaborateness of this inner holy place of the
larger sacred structure.

Now Echizenbori is not a particularly old quarter of the city. Long
after Edo was established, the city, step by step, fought its way down
to the river; filling in lagoons and swamps, and driving their waters
into the canals which were to furnish very largely the means of
communication for its traffic. Yotsuya on the contrary is old. Its
poverty is of later date. In the Edo days it was a favourite site for
the homes of _do[u]shin_, _yakunin_, and a whole herd of the minor
officials who had the actual working of the great Tokugawa machine of
government in their hands. In the maps of Ansei 4th year (1857) the
shrine of the O'Iwa Inari figures in Samoncho[u], in its Teramachi; a
small part of the great mass of red, indicating temples and shrines and
their lands, which then covered a large part of Yotsuya. How then did it
come to pass that the shrine was removed to this far off site in
Echizenbori, with such incongruous surroundings? The explanation must be
found in our story.

When the Tenwa year period (1681-83) opened, long resident at Yotsuya
Samoncho[u] had been Tamiya Matazaémon. By status he was a minor
official or _do[u]shin_ under the Tokugawa administration. These
_do[u]shin_ held highest rank of the permanent staff under the
bureaucratic establishment; and on these men lay the main dependence for
smoothness of working of the machinery of the Government. Matazaémon was
the perfect type of the under-official of the day; smooth, civilly
impertinent to his equals, harsh to his inferiors, and all unction and
abjectness to his superiors. Indeed, he laid more stress on those
immediately above him than on the more removed. To serve the greater
lord he served his immediate officer, being careful to allow to the
latter all the credit. No small part of his function was to see that
ceremonial form and precedent were carried out to the letter. It was the
accurate and ready knowledge of these which was of greatest import to
his chief, indeed might save the latter from disaster. Matazaémon's
readiness and conduct rendered him deservedly valued. Hence he enjoyed
the double salary of thirty _tawara_ of rice, largely supplemented by
gifts coming to him as teacher in _hanaiké_ (the art of flower
arrangement) and of the _cha-no-yu_ (tea ceremony). He had a more than
good house, for one of his class, facing on the wide Samoncho[u] road,
and with a garden on the famous Teramachi or long street lined with
temples and which runs eastward from that thoroughfare. The garden of
Tamiya almost faced the entrance to the Gwansho[u]ji, which is one of
the few relics of the time still extant. It was large enough to contain
some fifteen or twenty fruit trees, mainly the _kaki_ or persimmon, for
Matazaémon was of practical mind. Several cherry trees, however,
periodically displayed their bloom against the rich dark green foliage
of the fruit trees; and in one corner, to set forth the mystic qualities
of a small Inari shrine relic of a former owner, were five or six
extremely ancient, gnarled, and propped up plum trees, sufficient in
number to cast their delicate perfume through garden and house in the
second month (March).

Such was the home of Matazaémon; later that of O'Iwa San. It was
pretentious enough to make display with a large household. But the
master of Tamiya was as close-fisted and hard and bitter as an unripe
_biwa_ (medlar). His wealth was the large and unprofitable stone which
lay within; the acid pulp, a shallow layer, all he had to give to
society in his narrow minded adherence to official routine; the smooth,
easily peeled skin the outward sign of his pretentions to social status
and easily aroused acidity of temper. With most of his neighbours, and
all his relatives, he had a standing quarrel. Secure in his lord's
favour as an earnest officer, so little did he care for the dislike of
the ward residents that he was ever at drawn swords with the head of his
ward-association, Ito[u] Kwaiba. As for the relatives, they were only
too ready to come to closer intimacy; and Matazaémon knew it.

His household consisted of his wife O'Naka, his daughter O'Mino, and the
man servant Densuké. The garden Matazaémon would allow no one to attend
to but himself. The two women did all the work of the household which
ordinarily would fall to woman-kind, with something more. Densuké
performed the heavier tasks, accompanied his master on his outings, and
represented his contribution to the service of the ward barrier, the
O[u]kido[u], on the great Ko[u]shu[u]-Kaido[u] and just beyond the
O[u]bangumi. The barrier cut off Yotsuya from the Naito[u]-Shinjuku
district, and, as an entrance into Edo, was of considerable importance.
When the time of service came Densuké appeared in full uniform and with
his pike. A handsome young fellow of nineteen years, the women,
especially O'Mino, saw to it that his appearance should be a credit to
the House. His progress up the wide Samoncho[u], up to his disappearance
into the great highway, was watched by O'Mino--and by the neighbours,
who had much sharper eyes and tongues than Matazaémon and his wife. They
marvelled.

With ground for marvel. In the eyes of her parents O'Mino was the most
beautiful creature ever created. Occasionally Matazaémon would venture
on criticism. "Naka, something is to be said to Mino. Too much powder is
used on the face. Unless the colour of the skin be very dark, the use of
too much powder is not good. Mino is to be warned against excess." Thus
spoke the official in his most official tone and manner. Wife and
daughter heard and disobeyed; the wife because she was ruled by her
daughter, and the daughter because she would emulate the fair skin of
Densuké and be fairer in his eyes. O'Mino had suffered both from fate
and fortune. She had been born ugly; with broad, flat face like unto the
moon at full, or a dish. Her back was a little humped, her arms
disproportionately long, losing in plumpness what they gained in
extension. She seemed to have no breasts at all, the chest forming a
concavity in correspondence to the convexity of the back, with a
smoothness much like the inner surface of a bowl. This perhaps was no
disadvantage--under the conditions. So much for fate. But fortune had
been no kinder. "Blooming" into girlhood, she had been attacked by
smallpox. Matazaémon was busy, and knew nothing of sick nursing. O'Naka
was equally ignorant, though she was well intentioned. Of course the
then serving wench knew no more than her mistress. O'Mino was allowed to
claw her countenance and body, as the itching of the sores drove her
nearly frantic. In fact, O'Naka in her charity aided her. The result was
that she was most hideously pock-marked. Furthermore, the disease cost
her an eye, leaving a cavity, a gaping and unsightly wound, comparable
to the dumplings called _kuzumanju_, white puffy masses of rice dough
with a depression in the centre marked by a dab of the dark-brown bean
paste. The neighbours used to say that O'Mino was _nin san baké
shichi_--that is, three parts human and seven parts apparition. The more
critical reduced her humanity to the factor one. The children had no
name for her but "Oni" (fiend). They had reason for this. They would not
play with her, and treated her most cruelly. O'Mino, who was of no mild
temperament, soon learned to retaliate by use of an unusually robust
frame, to which was united by nature and circumstances her father's
acidity of character. When the odds were not too great all the tears
were not on O'Mino's side; but she suffered greatly, and learned with
years that the Tamiya garden was her safest playground.

O'Mino grew into a woman. Affection had to find some outlet. Not on the
practical and very prosaic mother; not on the absorbed and crabbed
father; but on Densuké, on the _samurai's_ attendant or _chu[u]gen_, it
fell. All manner of little services were rendered to him; even such as
would appropriately fall within his own performance. At first O'Mino
sought out little missions for him to perform, out of the line of his
usual duties, and well rewarded in coin. This was at his first
appearance in the house. Then she grew bolder. Densuké found his
clothing undergoing mysterious repairs and replacement. His washing,
even down to the loin cloths, was undertaken by the Ojo[u]san. Densuké
did not dare to question or thwart her. Any trifling fault O'Mino took
on herself, as due to her meddling. She became bolder and bolder, and
sought his assistance in her own duties, until finally they were as man
and maid employed in the same house. Matazaémon noted little increases
in the house expenses. O'Mino took these as due to her own extravagance.
The father grunted a little at these unusual expenditures. "What goes
out at one end must be cut off at the other end. Densuké, oil is very
expensive. At night a light is not needed. Be sure, therefore, on going
to bed to extinguish the light." Densuké at once obeyed his master's
order; and that very night, for the first time, O'Mino boldly sought his
couch. Confused, frightened, overpowered by a passionate woman, Densuké
sinned against his lord, with his master's daughter as accomplice.

Henceforth Densuké had what O'Mino was willing to give him. On
Matazaémon's going forth to his duties, O'Mino, and O'Naka under her
orders, did all his household work. The only return required was
submission to the exigencies of the Ojo[u]san. This was no slight
obligation. Densuké at times thought of escape, to his home at To[u]gané
village in Kazusa, to his uncle Kyu[u]bei in the Kanda quarter of Edo.
O'Mino seemed to divine his thoughts. She would overload him with
favors; or openly express her purpose of following wherever he went in
life. Kanda? Kyu[u]bei was a well-known hanger-on at the Tamiya.
Matazaémon entered him up in his expense book at so much a year.
To[u]gané? He could not get there except through Kyu[u]bei. Matazaémon
had farms there, and the _nanushi_ or village bailiff was his servant.
Besides, he would be a runaway. Matazaémon surely would come down on
Kyu[u]bei as the security. So the months passed, and matters were
allowed to drift. Perhaps it was some gossip of the quarter which
reached the deaf ears of Matazaémon. As he was about to go forth one day
he followed the figure of O'Mino sharply with his little eyes all
screwed up. "Naka, there seems change in the figure of Mino. Surely the
gossip of the neighbours as to Densuké is not true? Mino is said to
harbour a child by him. In such case it would be necessary to kill them
both. Warn Mino in time; a _chu[u]gen_ is not one to become the adopted
son (_muko_) of the Tamiya. He is an excellent lad, and costs but
little. His habits are not riotous. To dismiss him thus causelessly
would not only be unjust, but to no profit. Mino giving heed to the
warning, all will be well." With this the lord of the household stalked
forth to the house entrance. Receiving his clogs from O'Mino, he stalked
forth to his official attendance. The two women, prostrate in salutation
at his exit, raised their heads to watch him stalk.

It was a frightened face that O'Naka turned to her daughter. In
whispering voice--"The honoured father's words have been heard? If not,
it is to be said that gossip of the neighbourhood has come to his ears
as to relations with Densuké. He notices that an _obi_ is not often
worn; and when worn is soon discarded. However, a man's eye is not so
apt in such matters. Even in this Naka cannot speak positively.
Doubtless the report is not true." O'Mino, if ugly, was anything but
obtuse. Her mother must know; and yet not know. "My honoured father does
not consider the difference of age and status in Densuké. Densuké is but
a boy. This Mino has passed her twenty-third year. Moreover, surely she
deserves a better husband than a _chu[u]gen_. Least of all would she
give her father cause for regret or painful thoughts. Can a woman be
pregnant otherwise than by a man?" O'Mino, respectfully prostrate, with
this raised her head. The two women looked each other in the face.
Finally O'Naka said--"With joy is the answer heard. But Matazaémon San
is of hasty temper. In his suspicions even he is to be avoided. However,
the business of the house is to be performed. This will take the time
until late in the day. Tradesmen may come for payments of the month. In
the closet ten _ryo[u]_ in silver will be found. Here are the keys to
the chests. It would be well to take an inventory of the effects. The
winter is at hand. It is time to make warmer provision for it. Be sure
to observe circumspection." With these words, and a sad look at her
erring daughter, O'Naka donned street garb, threw a _haori_ (cloak) over
her shoulders, climbed down into her clogs, and their patter soon
disappeared down the street.

Her departure was almost coincident with the reappearance of Densuké.
His attendance on the master to the offices of the palace stables
accomplished, for the time being he had returned. Thus did Matazaémon
effect an outward state and an household economy. None too willing was
the presence of Densuké. He was faithful in his way to O'Mino, and much
afraid of her. Even in the most private intercourse to him she was the
Ojo[u]san, the daughter of the House; but he had no other recourse than
the Tamiya. Once assured of him, O'Mino had cut off all the previous
flow of coin, and with it the means of his rare indiscretions at the
Shinjuku pleasure quarter. Besides, their interviews took place in the
darkness of night. In the daytime O'Naka usually was present, who,
lacking other company, sought that of her daughter, and moreover was
unwilling to be too complacent in the intrigue she saw going on. As soon
as the sound of Densuké's steps was heard, O'Mino called him. There was
a sharpness in her tone, a note of alarmed decision, that frightened and
chilled him. Humbly he sought her presence. A glance showed the absence
of O'Naka, yet as usual he prostrated himself in salutation. In that
position he did not see her face. She said impatiently--"For salutation
there is no time nor occasion. It is no longer the Ojo[u]san who speaks;
it is the wife. My father knows all concerning this Mino and Densuké. On
his return he is sure to take the occasion of the presence of both to
kill us. It is his right and our duty to submit to his punishment. But
to do so consigns the infant in the womb from darkness to darkness. This
is too dreadful to contemplate. Unfilial though it be, we must run away.
Make up your mind to do so." Densuké looked up. She was bent in
meditation over this flight. The corners of the mouth widened out, the
eyelid drooping more conspicuously than ever and forming a heavy fold
over the empty socket, the bald brow, the scanty hair at the sides in
disordered whisps and strands, all these made her a hideous mask. He
could not endure the sight. Timidly he said--"Terrible news indeed! How
has it happened? Surely, honoured lady, you have been very rash; nay,
somewhat clumsy withal. Cannot women take their pleasure with whom they
please without such dire results? Ah! Such luxury, such pleasant
surroundings! All must be abandoned. This Densuké will seek his native
village in Kazusa. And the Ojo[u]san whither will she go; what will she
do?"

Was the question asked in innocence, or in deepest guile? O'Mino could
not have answered, well as she thought she knew Densuké. He felt a hand
on his shoulder. He sprang up in fright, hardly knowing whether it was a
demon, or O'Mino turned demon, who confronted him. Her mouth half open,
her large, white, shining, even teeth all displayed, her single eye
darting malignant gleams, and the empty socket and its fold quivering
and shaking, she was a frightful object. "To speak of pleasure without
the consequences, such talk is that of a fool. Densuké was taken for the
relationship of the two worlds. Now you would abandon me. Very well--do
so. But this Mino does not perish by her father's sword. The well is at
hand. Within three days I shall reappear and hunt you out. Torn to
pieces the wretched man shall die a miserable death. Better would it be
now to die with Mino. A last salutation...." Two vigorous arms seized
his neck. Densuké gave a cry of anguish as the sharp teeth marked the
ear. Letting him go, she sprang to the _ro[u]ka_ (verandah). Frightened
as he was, Densuké was too quick for her. He grasped her robe. "Nay! The
Ojo[u]san must not act so desperately. Densuké spoke as one clumsy, and
at a loss what to do ... yes ... we must run away ... there is the
uncle, Kawai, in Kanda. To him Densuké will go, and there learn the will
of Tamiya Dono." O'Mino's tragic attitude lapsed. At once she was the
practical woman of the house. She gave thanks for her mother's
foresight. "The escape is not as of those unprovided. Here are ten
_ryo[u]_ in silver. A bundle is to be made of the clothing and other
effects. This is to be carried by Densuké. And the uncle: Mino
presenting herself for the first time as wife, a present is to be
brought. What should it be?" She talked away, already busy with piling
clothes, quilts (_futon_), toilet articles onto a large _furoshiki_ or
square piece of cloth. Then she arrayed her person with greatest care,
and in the soberest and richest fashion as the newly-wed wife. With time
Densuké managed to get his breath amid this vortex of unexpected
confusion into which he had been launched. "The uncle's teeth are bad.
Soft _takuan_[3] is just the thing. For long he has eaten little else.
Four or five stalks are sufficient." He went to the kitchen to secure
this valued gift. Then he collected his own possessions. With the huge
bundle of the _furoshiki_ on his shoulders; with straw raincoat, sun
hat, clogs for wet and dry weather, piled on the top, and the stalks of
the _takuan_ dangling down; "it was just as if they were running away
from a fire." As Densuké departed O'Mino closely observed him. He was
too subdued, too scared to give her anxiety. Later she left the house to
join him at the Hanzo[u]-bashi, far enough removed from Yotsuya. It was
then Tenwa, 2nd year, 11th month (December, 1682).




CHAPTER II

KAWAI SAN OF KANDU KU


This uncle of Densuké, Kawai Kyu[u]bei by name, was a rice dealer, with
a shop in Matsudacho[u] of the Kanda district. The distance to go was
far. As with all ladies, O'Mino kept Densuké waiting long at the
Hanzo[u]-bashi. Indeed, there was much romance about this ugly,
neglected, hard girl. She waited until the sound of O'Naka's clogs was
heard. Then she halted at the corner of Teramachi until she could see
her mother's figure in the dusk; see it disappear into the house. When
she went down the street toward the Samégabashi she was crying. It was
late therefore--after the hour of the pig (9 P.M.)--when the pair
reached Kanda. The business of the day was long over in this business
section of Edo. The houses were tightly closed. On reaching the entrance
of Kyu[u]bei's house said Densuké--"Ojo[u]san, condescend to wait here
for a moment. The uncle is to be informed. Deign to have an eye to the
_furoshiki_. Please don't let the dogs bite into or insult the
_takuan_." He pounded on the door. Said a voice within--"Obasan
(Auntie)! Obasan! Someone knocks. Please go and open for them." The more
quavering and softer tones of an old woman made answer--"No, it is not
my turn and time to go to the door. Get up; and first make inquiry
before entrance is allowed. With little to lose, loss is much felt. Ah!
Tamiya Dono in the Yotsuya has been sadly neglected." The scolding tones
hummed on. Grumbling, the old man was lighting a rush. "'Tis agreed;
'tis agreed. To-morrow without fail this Kyu[u]bei visits Tamiya. Ah! It
is no jest to go to that house. Not only is the distance great, but...."
He had the door open, and his mouth too. "Densuké! Graceless fellow! But
what are you doing here, and at this hour? No; the luck is good. There
is a big bundle with you, a huge bundle." He spied the _takuan_ and his
face broadened into a smile. "Ah! If dismissed, it has been with honour.
Doubtless the _takuan_ is for this Kyu[u]bei. Thanks are felt. But is
all this stuff Densuké's? He has not stolen it? Doubtless a woman is at
the bottom of the affair. Never mind; an opportunity presents itself to
offer you as _muko_--at the Tatsuya in Yokomachi. Of late a boy has been
hoped for, but another girl presented herself. A _muko_ now will be
welcome. The wife is getting past child-bearing, and there is little
hope of a son. The Tatsuya girl is just the thing. In a few months she
will be fit to be a wife. She...."

Densuké edged a word into this stream. "The honoured uncle is right.
The cause of Densuké's appearance is a woman." The old man made a face.
Said he--"Well, in such a case it is good to be out of it. This
Kyu[u]bei has heard talk of Densuké--and of all things with the
Ojo[u]san! That would be terrible indeed. But how is the Oni (demon)?
What a sight she is! Bald, one-eyed, hairless, with a face like a dish
and no nose--Kyu[u]bei came suddenly on her at dusk in the Yotsuya. Iya!
It was cold feet and chills for him for the space of seven days. It is
that which keeps Kyu[u]bei from Yotsuya, although a little aid would go
far. The last dealings in rice notes were not favourable. Besides,
account is soon to be rendered to Tamiya Dono. But though wicked of
temper and ugly, O'Mino San is rich. Even for the demon in time a good
match will be found. She will be the wife of an honoured _kenin_
(vassal), and the husband will buy _geisha_ and _joro[u]_ with the
money. Such is the expectation of Tamiya Dono. Don't allow any trifling
there. Remember that she is the daughter of a _go-kenin_. They talk of
Densuké in the Yotsuya. Of course it is all talk. Don't allow it to
happen." Densuké found an opening. The words meant one thing; the
expression another. "It is not _going_ to happen." Kyu[u]bei looked at
him aghast as he took in the meaning. "What! With the demon? Densuké has
committed the carnal sin with the demon? Oh, you filthy scoundrel! Rash,
inconsiderate boy! Obasan! Obasan!... What did she pay you for the
deed?... This low fellow Densuké, this foolish rascal of a nephew, has
been caught in fornication with the demon.... What a fool! How is it
that death has been escaped? And you have run away. Doubtless a
pregnancy has followed. After putting his daughter to death Tamiya Dono
will surely hunt out Densuké. Or perhaps keep O'Mino San until he
catches the interloper. Sinning together, both will die together. Ah! To
cross the Sanzu no Kawa, to climb the Shide no Yama, with the demon as
company: terrific! It is terrific! And what has become of her? Why fall
into such a trap, with a woman old and ugly? Her riches are not for you.
Caught here, the _tatami_ of Kyu[u]bei will be spoiled."[4]

Densuké countered. He spoke in the old man's ear. "Refusing consent,
she threatened to kill herself and haunt this Densuké as O'Baké
(apparition). The Ojisan (uncle) has seen the Ojo[u]san. Would he be
haunted by her, be seized and killed with torture?... And then--here she
stands, just at the door." The old man spluttered, and gasped, and went
on his nose in abject salutation--"Oh, the fool!... the Ojo[u]san is
here in person ... he would trifle with the devil!... the low rascal
would seduce the honoured daughter of Tamiya ... put ten hags in a row
and pick out the worst ... will the Ojo[u]san condescend to honour
Kyu[u]bei's place.... Oh! She's a very O'Baké already. Pregnancy with a
beautiful woman is bad enough. With this demon it makes her an
apparition ... condescend to enter; deign to enter." O'Mino slowly came
forward. That what had been said by the rash and unconscious Kyu[u]bei
had escaped her ear was unlikely. The humility of demeanor hardly veiled
the offended dignity of her approach. "Densuké has spoken truth. We come
as husband and wife. Condescend to give shelter for the time being, and
become the intercessor with Tamiya Dono. Such is the prayer of this
Mino." As she spoke she bowed low on the _tatami_ (mats). Kyu[u]bei
caught the hint; for if she had heard the talk of Densuké, she had
assuredly heard his still louder ejaculations and ill-timed wit. The
Obasan was in a rage at him. Taking the conduct of affairs in her own
hand--"Condescend to make this poor dwelling a home for as long as
desired. Plainly the visitors have not come empty handed. Ma! Ma! 'Tis
like an escape from a fire. Densuké is a strong lad to shoulder such a
burden. But he always has been something of an ass. As for Matazaémon
Dono, to-morrow the Ojisan shall attend to the affair, and see what is
to be expected. Meanwhile, deign to be as in Samoncho[u] itself." The
kindly old woman pushed Kyu[u]bei and his clumsy apologies out of the
way. She busied herself about O'Mino. The two women understood each
other. The varied contents of the _furoshiki_ were quickly stowed away.
A little supper was prepared for the hungry fugitives. Kyu[u]bei sat by,
his eyes dazzled by the wealth of goods displayed, and his nostrils
shifting under the acrid perfume of the _takuan_ and remembrance of his
stupidity.

The next morning Kyu[u]bei was up betimes. Matazaémon was no dawdler.
It was best to catch him satisfied with the morning meal, and perhaps
beset by the night's regret over the loss of his daughter. In no way was
it a pleasant mission. Kyu[u]bei's pace became a crawl as he approached
the garden gate on Teramachi. He put in an appearance at the kitchen
side. O'Naka was here established, engaged in her duties and surely
awaiting him. At sight of him she burst into what was half laugh and
half tears. "Ah! It is Kyu[u]bei San. Doubtless he comes on the part of
Mino and Densuké. It is kind of Kyu[u]bei to befriend them. The Danna
(master) is very angry indeed. An only daughter, and one on whom he
depended for a _muko_, he is much upset. Please go in and talk with him.
Show anger at the runaways. To agree with him may somewhat soothe his
passion. Condescend so to act." Kyu[u]bei winked. And turn some of
this anger on himself? Well, agreement might rouse the spirit of
contradiction in Tamiya Dono. It was a characteristic of this hide-bound
official. Matazaémon was drinking the last sips of tea from his rice
bowl when the _sho[u]ji_ were gently pushed apart, and the head of
Kyu[u]bei inserted in the opening. At first he paid no attention. Then
as one in haste--"Ah! Is it Kyu[u]bei? He comes early to-day--and hardly
to apply for anything. The rice notes are not yet due for some weeks."
His tone was grim; the usual indifferent benevolence of demeanor toward
a townsman was conspicuously absent. Kyu[u]bei felt chilled. Densuké
must not sacrifice his good uncle to his own folly.

Said Kyu[u]bei--"Yet it is to seek the honoured benevolence of Tamiya
Dono that Kyu[u]bei comes." Matazaémon turned sharp around toward him.
Frightened, the townsman continued--"Densuké has acted very wickedly.
The low, lascivious rascal has dared to seduce the honoured daughter of
the House. Both are now harboured at the house of this Kyu[u]bei, who
now makes report. Their lives are in the hand of Tamiya Dono. But
Kyu[u]bei would make earnest plea for delay. O'Mino San being pregnant,
the child would be sent from darkness to darkness--a terrible fate. May
it be condescended to show the honoured mercy and benevolence. Evil and
unfilial though the action of the two has been, yet 'benevolence weighs
the offence; justice possesses two qualities.' Such are the words of
Ko[u]shi (Confucius)." The eyes of Matazaémon twinkled. He had heard
that Kyu[u]bei was on the verge of shaving his head (turning priest).
Truly the townsman was profitting by the exhortations of his teacher.
After a time he said--"The memory of Kyu[u]bei is excellent. Don't let
it fail him on the present occasion. For such a deed as has been
committed the punishment is death, meted out by the hand of this
Matazaémon. The fact ascertained, it was intended to kill them both. The
flight of Mino and Densuké has altered the complexion of the affair. It
is no longer necessary to inflict the extreme penalty. O'Mino is
disowned for seven births. Neither she nor Densuké is to appear before
this Matazaémon. If the talk of the ward be true, in exchange for a
loyal service Densuké has secured a beautiful bride. There can be no
regrets." Then, taking a sprightly and jeering air, "But this Kyu[u]bei
has been the one to exercise benevolence. Matazaémon now learns that the
two runaways have been received by him. Entertain them well; entertain
them well. Thanks are due to Kyu[u]bei San--from them. Doubtless he is
much occupied with his guests. Less will be seen of him in Yotsuya....
But official duties press. This Matazaémon must leave. Don't be in
haste. Stay and take some tea.... Naka! Naka! Tea for Kyu[u]bei San; the
_haori_ (cloak) of Matazaémon.... _Sayonara_.... Ah! The rice notes this
Matazaémon took up for Kyu[u]bei San, they fall due with the passage of
the weeks. But Kyu[u]bei is one who always meets his obligations. As to
that there is no anxiety." With this last fling the prostrate Kyu[u]bei
heard the sound of the clogs of Matazaémon on the flagged walk outside.
A departing warning to O'Naka as to the tea, and steps were heard
near-by. He raised his head, to confront the mistress of the house.

O'Naka spoke with tears in her eyes--a salve to the alarmed and
wounded feelings of Kyu[u]bei. "Don't be frightened. After all
Matazaémon is a _samurai_. To press Kyu[u]bei, or any tradesman, is
beyond him. But this Naka cannot see her daughter! To add to his anger
would bring disaster on her and the unborn child. Alas! Anyhow, give
Mino this money; and these articles of value, properly her own. Her
mirror has been forgotten in the hasty flight." O'Naka brought forth one
of those elaborate polished silver surfaces, used by the ladies of
Nippon in these later luxurious days of the Sho[u]gunate. It was only
now that it became the property of O'Mino. It was part of the wedding
outfit of O'Naka herself. With this little fiction the mother
continued--"When the child is born allow the grandmother at least a
distant sight of it. Perhaps it will resemble Tamiya; be like its
mother, and soften a father's heart." Now she wept bitterly; and
Kyu[u]bei wept with her--bitterly. "Like the mother! The Buddhas of
Daienji[5] would indeed weep at the appearance of such a monster." This
was his thought; not expressed with the humble gratitude, prostration,
and promises which he fully intended to keep. Kyu[u]bei reverentially
accepted the mirror, the goods, the money. Taking his leave of
Yotsuya--a long one he feared--with sighs he set out for Kanda. Here he
made his report. Said the old townsman with severity--"The will of the
parent is not to be disobeyed. It is the duty of this Kyu[u]bei to see
to its performance." He had O'Naka more in mind than the master of
Tamiya. O'Mino might yet be the goose to lay golden eggs. A goose of
such plumage! Kyu[u]bei made a wry face in the darkness of the corridor.




CHAPTER III

TAKAHASHI DAIHACHIRO[U]


Some means of support had to be found. Employed in a _kenin's_ house,
and leaving it under such conditions, kindred occupation was out of the
question. There was a sort of black list among these officials to cover
all grades of their service. Time and the host of servants of some great
House would get the lad back into the only occupation he understood.
Trusting to some such accident of fortune, Kyu[u]bei made Densuké his
agent on commission. Densuké was no idler. Kyu[u]bei managed to meet the
Tamiya security for his loans, largely through the efforts of the
younger man. The married couple at this time set up their establishment
in Goro[u]beicho[u] of Kyo[u]bashi Ku. Coming and going, often with no
definite task in hand, Densuké to all appearance was an out-and-out
idler. For the first time released from the trammels of her class,
O'Mino could attend the theatres and farce shows of the capital. She
delighted in acting this part of a tradesman's wife. Moreover she was
very sure of not meeting with Matazaémon, of whom she was in great fear.
Bound to the _formulæ_ of his class, her father might feel bound to cut
her down on sight.

One day Densuké was idling and hanging over the parapet of the
Nihonbashi. Some fishermen were violently quarrelling in the fish market
on the bank just below the bridge. As he looked on with interest a hand
was laid on his shoulder. Turning, he saw a man, partly in the dress of
a _chu[u]gen_, partly in that of a menial attendant of one of the larger
_yashiki_ (nobleman's mansion). Scars of burns on his hands and arms,
patches of rice flour and bran, showed that he was a cook. His eye was
severe and his manner abrupt as he rebuked Densuké. "An idle fellow!
This Taro[u]bei never fails to come across Densuké as an idler, or on
the way to Asakusa with the worthy wife. Is he fit for nothing?" Densuké
was a mild man. To this man with a grievance his answer was soft.
Besides he had no liking for the cook's knife stuck in the girdle, and
handy to carve fish or flesh. He said--"Perchance the idleness is more
in appearance than fact. Buying and selling on commission the task is an
irregular one. It is true, however, that this Densuké has no settled
labour. Alas! Former days in the service of a _samurai_ are much to be
regretted."--"Can you cook rice?" was the abrupt interruption. "This
Densuké knows the 'Sanryaku' fairly well. Is more needed?" The man
looked at him dumbfounded. "The 'Sanryaku'--what's that?"--"Knowledge of
the 'Sanryaku' enables one to meet all the requirements of a _bushi_
(knight).[6] At the school in Kazusa To[u]gané the priest who taught
this Densuké, at one time a _samurai_, was far more taken with the
'Sanryaku' than with the _Sutra_ (Scripture); the lessons taught applied
more to Bushido[u] (the knight's way) than to Butsudo[u] (the way of the
Buddha).... But to the point; this Densuké for three years cooked the
rice at Tamiya in Yotsuya. First there is the _toro-toro_ of bubbling
water; then the _biri-biri_, as what little remains passes as steam
through the rice grains. Then the sharp whistling cry of a baby from the
pot on the slow fire (_murashite_). The task is done, and the vessel is
removed from the stove." The man looked with respect on this learned
cook. Said he--"Densuké is the man. Taro[u]bei must leave the kitchen of
Geishu[u] Sama at once. The mother is ill in Aki province. A substitute
is to be found. The salary--is next to nothing; but the perquisites are
numerous, and the food ample to feed several Densuké and their wives.
Deign to accept." Densuké did not hesitate--"The obligation lies with
Densuké. But how secure the position? There is Tamiya...." The man
laughed. "There are many Densuké in Edo; and no connection between the
_yashiki_ of Matsudaira Aki no Kami and the house of a _do[u]shin_ in
Yotsuya. There is small likelihood of meeting old acquaintances. Be sure
to remember that it is Densuké of Kyo[u]bashi; not Densuké of Yotsuya.
This pass will answer to the gate-man. Substitutes are common. Whether
it be Densuké or Taro[u]bei who cooks the rice makes no difference;
provided the rice be well cooked. Taro[u]bei's service lies elsewhere;
to Densuké San deep his obligation." He held out the pass, and Densuké
took it.

With mutual salutation and joy in heart they parted. Densuké betook
himself to the _yashiki_ of Matsudaira Aki no Kami at Kasumigaseki. No
difficulties were encountered. Taro[u]bei was not so superlative as a
cook that the substitute could not be better than the original. At this
place Densuké acted the part of the _komatsukibatta_. This is a narrow
brown weevil, some three parts of an inch in length, and which stands on
its head making the repeated movements of _o'jigi_, much as at a
ceremonial encounter in Nippon. Densuké was not long in becoming well
liked. He was ready to run errands for all, outside of the hours of his
duties. From those higher up in the _yashiki_ these errands brought him
coin. Every month he could bring O'Mino twenty to thirty _mon_ in
"cash"; apart from the ample rations of rice and _daikon_ bestowed on
the kitchen staff. Nay: as cook at times fish could not be allowed to
spoil, and fell to the perquisites of Densuké. Thus time passed; and
with it the delivery of O'Mino, and the crisis in the affairs of Densuké
approached. Now Geishu[u] Sama[7] was a fourth month _daimyo[u]_. Hence
with the iris blossoms he took his departure from Edo to the government
of his fief in Aki province. The Sakuji Machibugyo[u], one Takahashi
Daihachiro[u], plead illness on this occasion of the exodus. As unable
to accompany his lord he remained in Edo. On plea of convenience he
established himself in the abandoned quarters of the _ashigaru_ or
common soldiers, situated right over Densuké's cooking stoves. Entirely
removed from the bustle of the household, except during Densuké's now
rare attendance, he secured complete isolation and quiet. Densuké went
on cooking for Takahashi Sama, just as if it had been for the whole
military household. Daihachiro[u] was a forbidding kind of man; and it
was with no amiable look that he greeted Densuké when the latter
appeared very late to prepare the meal. It being the 5th month 5th day
(the _sekku_) of Tenwa 3rd year (30th May, 1683), perhaps he suspected
Densuké of preparation for, and participation in, the great festival
which was in progress. "Densuké is very late. This Daihachiro[u] has
made the trial; to find out that he is no cook. Indeed the right hand
has been severely burnt. A cook should be on time--for the meal, not the
_matsuri_." Densuké was all apology--"Nay, Danna Sama; it is not the
festival which has detained Densuké. An infant was expected to-day by
the wife. Hence Densuké's neglect. Deign to pardon him."--"A baby being
born is no reason why Daihachiro[u] should starve. Prepare the meal in
haste. The rice is to be soft; and please see that the fish also is
soft. Make the sauce not too sharp. It would give great trouble to make
the bath in the quarters. In Owarimachi, or Kubomachi, good bath-houses
are to be found." Densuké took the hint. At once he recommended one he
thought befitting the great man's greatness. "Well: _Sayonara_. See that
the meal is ready by the return." Off stalked Takahashi Daihachiro[u],
towel dangling from his hand, and toothbrush and bran bag in his bosom.

Densuké gave a sigh of relief as he left the court. Daihachiro[u] often
employed him on missions, and was never particularly generous even when
the transaction was decidedly shady. Densuké was dreadfully afraid of
him. Somehow he felt as if Daihachiro[u] was Fate--his fate. Turning to
his stoves, the pots and the pans, the meal soon was in successful
preparation. As Densuké lifted the cover to inspect the rice--splash! A
great red spot spread in widening circle over the white mass. In fright
Densuké clapped on the lid of the pot. He looked upward, to locate this
unusual condiment to his provision. On his forehead he received in
person a second consignment. Applying his finger to his head, and then
to his nose--"Blood! Ah! O'Také's fierce cat has caught a rat and is
chewing it in the room above. How vexatious! If the Danna should find
out...." Hastily he tried to shove his equipment to one side. This would
not do. The massive stone blocks forming the furnace were too heavy for
Densuké to move unaided. Somewhat helpless he looked around. The rice
was almost done; ready for the process of _murashité_, or simmering over
the slow fire. The fish, carefully prepared, as yet was to be cooked.
All was to be ready against the return of Daihachiro[u] Sama. Ah! Again
the dropping began. As finding some channel in the rough boarding of the
ceiling it came fast. His kitchen began to look like the place where the
Eta (outcasts) slaughter beasts. Densuké shuddered.

Circumstances, the results involved, make the timid brave. Grasping a
pole Densuké started up the ladder leading to the loft and the quarters
of the _ashigaru_. Arrived at the top his eyes took in the poor
apartment. The rafters and beams of a low-cast roof; six wretched
(Loo-choo) mats on the floor, for the men to sit, and sleep, and live
upon; such its bare equipment. In the middle of the mats was a great red
stain. Densuké was at once attracted to it. "A cat would eat a rat; but
it would not wipe up the blood." His eyes were caught by the straw
basket used to store away the raincoats. This was all stained red at the
bottom. Going close up he found it was wet. Perhaps the cat was at work
inside. Densuké raised the cover and looked in. In alarm he sprang back.
On the trunk and limbs of a body was placed a freshly severed head.
Without replacing the cover, with pole uplifted over his head in
defence, Densuké backed toward the ladder. His one idea was to flee this
_yashiki_. As he reached the top of the steps the voice of Daihachiro[u]
was heard below--"A pest on such filthy bath-houses; and filthier
patrons.... What! No rice yet, Densuké? Ah! Where is the fellow?"
Densuké looked down, to meet the altered countenance of Daihachiro[u]
looking up. He retreated as the latter sprang up the ladder.
Daihachiro[u] gave a rapid glance. He saw the raised cover of the
basket. The next moment the bosom of Densuké's dress was harshly
grasped, and he himself was forced down on the floor. Gloomily
Daihachiro[u] regarded him--"Rash and curious fellow! Why not keep to
your pots and pans? Densuké loses his life; and Daihachiro[u] a fool for
a cook." He had drawn his sword to strike. Densuké clung to his knees in
petition--"Pardon, master! Pardon! This Densuké is no idle gossip. The
dripping blood threatened to spoil the meal. Thinking the cat was eating
a rat, fearing the anger of the Danna Sama if the meal had to be
re-cooked, Densuké came up here to chase the animal away. Thus the crime
was discovered...."--"Crime!" thundered Daihachiro[u]. "Ah! This
intermeddler must certainly die. By the word of a _samurai_...." In his
terror Densuké almost put his hand over the irrevocable sentence. He
spoke with life at stake. "Deign, master, to pardon Densuké. He has
committed no offence; knows of no offence in others. Densuké has seen
nothing. Life is a jewel, to be kept at any cost. Densuké is far too
insignificant to deserve the anger of Takahashi Sama." He grovelled in
the abject terror of his petition.

Takahashi Daihachiro[u] hesitated. An idea seemed to occur to him, at
sight of the man's fear-struck state. He smiled grimly. "Densuké saw the
head?"--"'Tis so," admitted Densuké. "But to see a head means nothing."
Daihachiro[u] dragged him over to the raincoat basket. Holding him down,
he grasped the head by the cue and lifted it out. "Look!" Densuké gave a
cry of surprise at sight of the features of a once neighbour. "It is the
head of Iséya Jusuké, the money lender of Hacho[u]bori; a hard man.
Surely the Danna...."--"Just so," replied Daihachiro[u], carelessly
throwing the mortuary relic back into the basket. "Borrowing five
_ryo[u]_, in six months with the interest the sum now due is twenty-five
_ryo[u]_. Pleading illness Daihachiro[u] remained in Edo, to try and
soften the usurer. He threatened a report to my lord; grew insolent
beyond measure. The sword drawn, he was killed forthwith.... Here
Densuké finds his use and saves his life. This body is an awkward
impediment. Densuké must take and cast it away. Otherwise, a second head
is added to this first. With one already to dispose of a second gives no
difficulty. Decide: is it agreed? Moreover there will be payment." He
took out a money belt (_do[u]maki_), that of Jusuké. Densuké recognized
it. Daihachiro[u] had robbed Jusuké, after killing him. Lovingly he ran
the golden _ryo[u]_ through his fingers. Seventy of them Densuké
counted. Daihachiro[u] picked out three _ryo[u]_. "Here is payment. Life
is spared, and it is agreed to cast away the body." Stammered
Densuké--"On the rubbish heap?" Daihachiro[u] looked at him--"You fool!
Why not proclaim that Densuké murdered Jusuké? Once the gate is
passed--and this Daihachiro[u] goes in company so far--it is Densuké who
is the murderer of Jusuké. Remain in this place until night. Then off
with the body; pitch it into the ditch of Kuroda Ke, or that of Saio[u]
Dono. Daihachiro[u] now takes his meal. There is nothing wrong with it?"
He looked meaningly at Densuké. The latter, with eyes on the shining
sword, at once denied all defilement. He now plumed himself on the care
taken of the Danna's interests. Daihachiro[u] descended; to feed at ease
and keep watch over the unwilling Densuké.

In the 5th month (June) the days are long. Densuké was a coward; and
for company had the corpse of the murdered Jusuké. To the poor cook the
time passed was torture. He was continually going to the stair and
calling down--"Danna Sama, has the time come?... Ah! The sky is light.
The streets at night will be full of people with lanterns. Plainly
O'Tento[u] Sama (the Sun) has forgotten to decline in the West. Alas!
This Densuké is most unlucky." At last the hour of the dog was passing
(7-9 P.M.). Daihachiro[u] appeared. "Now for the corpse! Wrap it up in
this matting.... Coward! Is Densuké afraid of a dead man?" He took the
body and cut the tendons of arms and legs. Then he placed the head on
the belly. Doubling the limbs over the body so as to hold the head he
wrapped the matting around the whole. The outside he covered with some
red raincoats--"in case of accidental stains." Then he strongly roped
the whole together. He stood back to inspect a truly admirable job.
Densuké wondered how many usurers Daihachiro[u] had thus disposed of.
His speculations were interrupted. Everything was ready. "Now! the loan
of Densuké's back." Groaned Densuké--"Danna Sama, a request."--"What?"
asked Daihachiro[u]. "Condescend to put a board between the body of
Densuké and that of Jusuké. The head might seize and bite me with its
teeth." Daihachiro[u] snorted with laughter, contempt, and anger mixed.
"What a cowardly rascal you are! Off with it as it is." Said Densuké
respectfully and firmly--"The task is that of Densuké. Condescend so far
to favour him." His obvious terror threatened collapse even of the
influence of Daihachiro[u]. An old remnant of the back of a corselet was
at hand. Said Daihachiro[u]--"This is still better. It is metal. In it
goes. Now off with you." Stalking along in the rear of the unfortunate
cook, Daihachiro[u] kept within easy distance of a sword blow. At the
gate he said--"Pray grant passage. Densuké takes washing of this
Daihachiro[u]--bed quilts and _futon_ to be renovated."--"Respectfully
heard and understood." The gate-man let fall the bar and stood aside.
Densuké passed into the street. A little way off he looked around.
Takahashi Daihachiro[u] had disappeared. Now indeed it was an affair
between Densuké and Jusuké.[8]




CHAPTER IV

THE APPEARANCE OF O'IWA SAN


Shouldering his pack Densuké made off down the broad space lined by the
white walls of the _yashiki_. In this quarter of the _bushi_ the highway
was not crowded with citizens and their lanterns. Densuké had high hopes
of an early disposition of the incubus. He approached the ditch which
protected the wall of the _yashiki_ of Prince Kuroda. When about to put
down the bundle a hail reached him from the _samurai_ on guard at the
Kuroda gate. "Heigh there, rascal! Wait!" But Densuké did not wait. In
terror he gave the load a shift on his shoulder and started off almost
at a run. On doing so there was a movement within. The cold sweat stood
out on the unhappy man's forehead. A moment, and would the teeth of
Jusuké be fastened in his shoulder? "Ah! Jusuké San! Good neighbour!
This Densuké is but the wretched agent. 'Tis Daihachiro[u] Sama who
killed Jusuké. Deign to pursue and haunt Takahashi Sama. Jusuké San!
Jusuké San!" Fright gave him strength and boldness. The Tora no Mon
(Tiger gate) of the castle should be the place of disposal. Here the
ditch was deep and dark. But to its very edge swarmed the people with
their lanterns on this night of festival in early summer. The moor of
Kubomachi was his next goal. At this period it really was open ground.
With a sigh of relief Densuké let the bundle slip from his now weary
shoulders. Alive he would have laughed at the idea of carrying the
portly Jusuké. Yet here the usurer bestrode him, far heavier weight than
on other unfortunate clients. "Let's have a look at him; address him
face to face." His hand was on the knot, when a woman's voice spoke in
his ear. Densuké did not wait to ascertain the nature of her
solicitation. He sped away into the darkness, toward the distant city.
Without goal, he found himself at Shiodomé.[9] Crossing the Shimbashi he
entered on the crowded and lighted Owaricho[u]. It was only the hour of
the pig (9 P.M.), and the house lanterns as yet burned brightly. He
hesitated, with the idea of turning toward Shiba, of trying his luck in
this still rustic district; or on the seashore, not far off.

A man close by greeted him. "Iya! Densuké San at last is found. The
honoured wife suffers great anxiety. Thinking that the festival might be
the attraction this Goémon set out to find you. Deign to hasten at once
to Goro[u]beicho[u]." Densuké shifted his burden away from the man. Did
it not already somewhat taint the air? His nostrils were wide open in
alarmed inquiry. He made excuses. With his heavy pack he would follow
after slowly. He was overwhelmed by his neighbour's kindness. Goémon
offered to share the work. Densuké did more than refuse. Unable to shake
off his companion in stolid desperation he took his way to his home in
the tenement (_nagaya_). "Tadaima" (just now--present), he called from
the doorway. Entering the shabby room he put down the _furoshiki_ in a
distant corner. Going to the Butsudan, or house altar, at once he lit
the lamps. O'Mino eyed him with astonishment. "What's that?" she asked,
pointing to the bundle--"Washing of Daihachiro[u] Sama"--"But Mino is
ill. So situated she cannot do washing. How negligent!"--"It makes no
matter," replied Densuké recklessly. O'Mino did not like the tone of his
voice. She eyed him sharply. Then more pressing matters urged. "Weary as
you are it is to be regretted; but money must be in hand, for the
midwife and other expenses. A few hours, and this Mino will be unable to
leave her bed--for three turns (weeks). There is cooking and washing to
be done. Please go to Kyu[u]bei San and ask the loan of a _ryo[u]_.
Perhaps he will give half."--"He will give nothing," was the surly reply
of Densuké. "Of loans he has grown tired of late. As the uncle is the
only stay in dire necessity care must be taken not to offend. Moreover,
the loan is unnecessary. Here are three _ryo[u]_." He brought out the
shining oblong pieces. O'Mino's eyes were bright with terror. "Ah! Has
Densuké turned thief? How was this money secured? What has happened? Why
so late in returning?" But Densuké was made confident and ready of
tongue by the physical helplessness of O'Mino. "Don't be alarmed.
Densuké is neither thief nor murderer. He is no Shirai Gompachi. Perhaps
there is a corpse within, not washing. Would the Ojo[u]san see a head,
arms, legs, freshly severed?" He laughed harshly as she turned her head
from him to the bundle, then back again. "This money was given to
Densuké by Takahashi Sama; in return for faithful service in an
important matter. Don't be frightened. It has been honestly earned."
Said O'Mino, almost to herself--"But Daihachiro[u] Sama is not one to
give such a sum as three _ryo[u]_. He is always in debt. The wife of
Jusuké San complains of his delays with her husband. However...."
Confidence restored, she bade Densuké put the money in the drawer of the
toilet stand. Then he was to prepare some food; for themselves, and for
the neighbours ready to assist at the expected birth.

Densuké did so, his eyes shifting from O'Mino to the stove, from the
stove to the deadly bundle. Finally he removed the _furoshiki_ to their
outer room, mumbling some excuse as to the foulness of a buck-basket. He
returned to his cooking. Barely tasting some food O'Mino soon was sound
asleep. Densuké observed her. "Ugly, rich, a very _O'Baké_ in appearance
is the Ojo[u]san; and yet she takes as husband a spiritless creature,
such as is this Densuké. Is it good or bad fortune? How grateful would
be her advice." He went to bed himself in the outer room; to spend a
hideous night of nightmare in company with the dead Jusuké, who now did
taint the air with that indefinable pollution of even the freshest
corpse. Wild visions floated through the brain of Densuké. The
neighbours would assemble. The food was ready. Ah! Here comes the wife
of Jusuké San. She demands her husband. A moment, and Densuké was
stealing from the house entrance into the darkness. The river? Ah! That
was it. The canal of Hacho[u]bori was close at hand to Jusuké's own
home. It would float him to his very door. Densuké soon saw himself at
the river bank. No one was at hand. Splash! In went the foul burden.
There it was again. But now it was Jusuké in person. "Jusuké San! Jusuké
San! Pardon! 'Twas not this Densuké who killed you. Seek vengeance of
Daihachiro[u] Sama. He is the murderer." In his terror he lost all fear
of being heard. He shouted at the top of his lungs. But Jusuké laid a
heavy hand on him. With one long drawn out groan Densuké--awoke.

O'Mino was leaning close over him, her face spectre-like with pain.
Seeing that he was awake she took away her hand. "What is the matter
with you? All night you have been shouting and mumbling in sleep. Just
now it was 'Jusuké San! Jusuké San! Daihachiro[u] Sama!' It is indeed a
matter of Jusuké San. The time of Mino is at hand; the pains begin. Go
at once to the house of Jusuké, and ask his wife O'Yoshi to condescend
her aid." Densuké sprang up. An idea flashed into his mind. He would go
to Hacho[u]bori and make full confession. Which was the most important?
O'Yoshi as confessor or as midwife? With his brain thus puzzled over an
answer he started off. His last injunction to O'Mino was--"by no means
meddle with the bundle of Daihachiro[u] Sama." There could have been no
more direct invitation to her to do so. For a short time O'Mino did
nothing but eye the strange bundle. Then she was on her knees before it,
examining it. "Rain coats as wrapping! And tied with rope: a queer kind
of washing. What a strange odour! Pickled _daikon_ (_nukamisozuké_)?"
She shook it. Something inside went _gotsu-gotsu_. This was too much for
her curiosity. Her old suspicion came back, that Densuké had turned
robber. She poked a little hole in the straw wrapping. Some kind of
cloth covering was within; a _kimono_ without doubt. Through its tissue
something shone white. The kitchen knife was close at hand on the
brazier (_hibachi_). She reached out, and in a moment the rope was
severed. "Oya! Oya!" Out rolled a head. An arm, two helpless flexible
legs were extended before her. With a scream of horror O'Mino fell flat
on her back. Lying stretched out she uttered one sharp cry after
another. The neighbouring wives came hurrying in, a stream of humanity.
"What is wrong? A young wife screams not without cause. Oya! Oya! O'Mino
San has given birth to a baby and a head. Iya! Head, limbs, body--a
monstrous parturition!" With the woman groaning in the pain of her
delivery, the wives in confusion, children flying to summon the men
folk, the whole district was in an uproar. In the midst of the confusion
arrived Densuké and the wife of Jusuké. As yet he had not found courage
to confess. He was still "deciding." A neighbour greeted him--"Densuké
San! Strange things have happened to O'Mino San. She has given birth to
a head and a baby at the same time. Hasten, Densuké San! Hasten!"
Densuké did hasten; but it was to disappear down the nearest byway in
headlong flight. Amazed and confounded the wife of Jusuké proceeded
alone to the house; as the first thing to set eyes on the head of her
husband, eyes still open and glaring in death. With a cry she
precipitated herself upon it; took it in her arms. The midwife, summoned
in haste, parted infant from mother. Thus did O'Iwa San come forth into
the world.

The affair was grave. The _kenshi_ (coroner) was soon on the scene.
O'Mino with feeble voice told what she knew. "Deign to examine into the
affair beyond the surface. My husband Densuké is not the man to commit
this crime. Ask the neighbours, who know him. Last night he brought
three _ryo[u]_, given him by Takahashi Daihachiro[u] Sama, the Sakuji
Machibugyo[u] of Geishu[u] Ko[u]. He said that it was for important
service rendered. There is no doubt that Takahashi San is the murderer.
Deign to examine well; show benevolence.... Ah! This Mino shall have
vengeance. For seven lives Daihachiro[u] shall be pursued...." Her eyes
became injected with blood. Her breast heaved painfully in the attempt
to get air. The women around her gave cries of alarm. O'Mino sank back
in a pool of blood. She had died in the midst of her curse. Said one
present--"This To[u]kichi would not be the honoured Sakuji Sama; nay,
not for the full seven existences in human form." The others felt as he
did. Even the _kenshi_ drew up his shoulders a little at the frightful
mask of the dead woman's face. He could learn but little. Kyu[u]bei,
soon at hand, petitioned for the dead body of O'Mino and the custody of
the infant. The neighbours corroborated the story of O'Mino; but Densuké
had disappeared. Daihachiro[u] never had confidence in his agent. His
preparations for flight had been made before Densuké's discovery, and
almost together with Densuké he had passed out the gate of Geishu[u]
Sama, with the seventy _ryo[u]_ provided by Jusuké. Report being made to
the Machibugyo[u] a "grass dividing" search was made, without result. No
trace of either man was found. As for the child born under these
auspicious conditions, Kyu[u]bei went at once to Tamiya Matazaémon and
made report. With bowed head the old man awaited the decision. Said
Matazaémon--"The name giving is to take place on the seventh night.
Kyu[u]bei will not fail to be present." He did not speak further. Thus
the offence of the parents was pardoned in O'Iwa the infant; the
grandchild of a man and woman passing the period of middle age.[10]




CHAPTER V

THE AFFAIR OF THE SHIBA KIRIDO[U]SHI[11]


It was Genroku 8th year (1695). O'Iwa, a girl of twelve years, could
understand what came to her ears. In dealing with each other the
Nipponese are very exact and exacting. The New Year must start with a
clean balance sheet for the tradesman--all bills paid and collected. The
last night of the dying year, and its last few hours; this time is the
busiest and most anxious. Zensuké, the _banto[u]_ (clerk) of the Shimaya
dry goods shop, accompanied by one Jugoro[u], was passing the Shiba
Kirido[u]shi. It was the hour of the tiger (3 A.M.). Of the two,
Jugoro[u] was the fighting man. Juro[u]zaémon of the Shimaya had
provided him with a short sword and sent him as guard to Zensuké, who
would have more than three hundred _ryo[u]_ in gold. Said
Jugoro[u]--"Banto[u] San, whither now? The hour is late."--"It is never
late on the _o[u]misoka_ (31st of the 12th month)," replied Zensuké
tersely. "However, there remains but one account to collect; at
Nishikubo. We will hasten."--"Go on ahead," said Jugoro[u]. "A moment
here for a necessity." Thus the two men became separated by nearly a
_cho[u]_ (100 yards). The district was one of _yashiki_ and temples. The
white walls of the former blended with the white carpet of snow on the
ground. At any hour it was no busy place; now it was desolate. The high
banks of the cutting crowned by woods and approached through the trees,
made it an ideal place for a hold-up. Zensuké hesitated. He slowed his
pace to allow his companion to join him. He thought he saw something
move in the darkness close by. From behind a tree just before him came a
_samurai_. Two others followed this man from the shadows. The heads of
all three men were covered by _zukin_ (hoods). They wore vizors. "Wait!"
Zensuké stopped in fright. "What suspicious rascal is this, travelling
the quarter at this hour? Probably some clerk making off with his
master's funds. Come now! Give them into better keeping. Low fellow! You
are fairly trapped." Zensuké began to retreat, but two of the men were
now behind him. He began to shout for Jugoro[u]. The latter came up at a
run--"Honoured Sirs! This is the Banto[u] San of the Shimaya of Honjo[u]
Itcho[u]me. He is collecting the house bills. Deign not to disturb
him."--"Shut up!" was the reply of the leader. "Another fellow of the
same kidney. Look to him." Roughly he thrust his hand into Zensuké's
bosom and began to hustle and fumble the clerk. When Jugoro[u] would
interfere the two other men prevented him. With fright he saw the money
belt of the _banto[u]_ dangling from the man's hand. The nature of the
affair was plain. "Heigh! Jokes don't go, honoured sirs. We are not
suspicious fellows. Condescend to pardon us." As he spoke he took
advantage of the negligence of his opponents, their interest in the
struggle of Zensuké and their leader, to wrench himself free. At once
his sword was out. Jugoro[u] was of no mean skill. None of his wardsmen
could face him. One man received severe wounds in scalp and face. The
other lost part of his hand. But Jugoro[u] was no match for the odds of
two trained soldiers. He was soon cut down. Meanwhile Zensuké was
shouting lustily for aid. At this period there was a guard called the
_tsujiban_ (cross-roads watch). It was mostly composed of oldish men not
fit for active service. Such regulations as there were they observed.
These were very severe; but, as with the present day police, kept them
to their post. They rarely troubled themselves to patrol their district.
From these men there could be little hope of aid. Just then, however,
the train of some lord came in sight. With one hand the leader held
Zensuké by the bosom of his robe. The hand holding the money belt was
already thrust in his own bosom. In a moment it would be free. Then
Zensuké would go in company with Jugoro[u] to the Yellow Fountain (in
Hell). His captor gave a startled cry. "The train of Geishu[u] Sama!
Lose no time!" As he wrenched himself away Zensuké sank his teeth deep
into the man's hand. With a howl of pain the fellow made off, exchanging
a little finger for the three hundred and twenty-five _ryo[u]_ in
Zensuké's _do[u]maki_.

The _banto[u]_ crouched in conventional attitude by the roadside. His
distress was plain; the prostrate body of a man evidence of some unusual
condition. A _samurai_ left the passing train and came up to
investigate. "Ah! Robbery and murder: follow behind to the _tsujiban_.
It is their affair." With moans and groans Zensuké made his report. He
was indignant at the luxury of these watchmen, toasting at their fire.
They noted it; looked at each other and out into the snowy night, and
laughed with contempt. For a tradesman's money belt were they to disturb
themselves? They questioned him harshly, in such way as to excuse any
further effort on their part. Surely the thieves by this time were at
the other end of Edo. Two of them, however, did accompany Zensuké to the
scene of the hold-up. Casting an eye over Jugoro[u]'s mangled corpse,
said one--"A good fight: the occasion has been missed. As perhaps the
criminal this man is to be bound. Probably his intent was to run away
with the master's funds." Roughly they seized him, hustled him back to
the guardhouse. Trussed up Zensuké had to spend the hours in alarm and
fear. Luckily the _kenshi_ soon appeared. It was the _o[u]misoka_. No
official business would be performed during the three days following.
Jugoro[u] could hardly exercise patience and remain as he was for that
space of time. So the examination was duly held. The Shimaya soon
secured the body of Jugoro[u] and the release of Zensuké. The latter's
evidence was put on record; none too satisfactory, as the concealing
_zukin_ prevented any recognition or description of the features of the
assailants. He only knew of the cries of impatience at wounds received,
and knew that he had left his mark on his own opponent. How then were
they to be run down? The _kenshi_ showed some impatience. Said he to the
captain of the _tsujiban_--"Why truss up this man, even though a
tradesman? He has all his own fingers, and the corpse lacks none." He
touched the severed finger with his baton. With this all were dismissed,
and to all seeming the affair was forgotten.

The Tokugawa had their plain-clothes police. One of the most noted was
Magomé Yaémon of Hacho[u]bori. His great grandfather had captured
Marubashi Chuya, of note in the rebellion of Yui Shosetsu at the time of
the fourth Shogun Iyetsuna Ko[u]. One day this Magomé Dono, in company
with a _yakunin_ (constable) named Kuma, was rummaging the poorer
districts of Shitaya Hiroko[u]ji. The two men were disguised as charcoal
burners, and attracted little attention. All the legitimate profession
in the way of medicine and pharmacy had been ransacked by the magistrate
(_machibugyo[u]_) of the south district. Yaémon felt sure that there
were still some by-ways. "Who's that fellow?" he asked Kuma. The
constable laughed. "He's a _sunékiri_ (shin-cutter). The rascals can be
told by their tough dark blue cotton socks, the coarse straw sandals,
and the banded leggings. Deign to note the long staff he carries. They
peddle plasters--shin plasters, guaranteed to cure any wound, to stop
any flow of blood. A man's arm hangs but by a strip of skin; the blood
flows in torrents. Apply the plaster and the flow ceases at once, the
arm heals. They drive a roaring trade, even among the _bushi_
(_samurai_); selling a shell here, two there. As for their real
usefulness...." He laughed.[12] They followed after the man and soon
came to a guard house. Said Magomé San--"Detain that man yonder. He is
to be examined." The ward officer was a little surprised--"Respectfully
heard and understood. It is old Yamabayashi Yo[u]gen." Soon the man
entered the guard house. Said the official drily--"Magomé Dono is here
to talk with Yo[u]gen. What has he been up to?" But the old fellow was
confident. "Thanks are felt." With the ease of the righteous and
prosperous he passed into the presence of Yaémon. The latter greeted him
with a non-official genial smile. "Ah! This is Yamabayashi Yo[u]gen, the
head of the _Sunékiri_. And business?"--"Truly this Yo[u]gen is
grateful. Man was born with teeth. Men and women still seek each other's
company. So long as such endures Yo[u]gen finds profit."--"And
plasters?"--"They are the affair of To[u]kichi. Would his worship deign
to examine him ... condescend dismissal. At once he presents himself."

Thus in short order the straight haired, unshaven, low browed
To[u]kichi stuck his head into the Sanbashi guard house. "Deign to
pardon this To[u]kichi. The honoured benevolence...." The ward officer
eyed him knowingly and quizzically. "Shut up! Magomé Dono has questions
to ask about clients. Wait until the questions deal with the doings of
To[u]kichi. That will be well. Then it will be time enough to lie.
Meanwhile, be sure and tell the truth." With this disinterested advice
To[u]kichi was passed to the presence. Once more conscience spoke louder
than caution. "The honoured benevolence, the honoured pity; condescend
the honoured examination into the innocence of To[u]kichi." Yaémon
laughed. "Fortunately it is not a matter of To[u]kichi, but of his
plasters. Who bought these at this year's Sho[u]gwatsu (New Year)? Be
careful in answer. The case is a bad one." To[u]kichi considered. "The
first day of the New Year a man came. His purchase of salve was large.
In the course of the past three months he has been many times to buy.
His visits now are wider spaced, and he praises the goods--as he ought.
No hand ever had a worse poisoned wound. He...."--"Age and appearance?"
interrupted Yaémon, now all attention. He had struck a trail. "Perhaps
fifty years; fair of complexion, tall, and stout. By his lordly manner
he must at least be a _go-kenin_, or a charlatan." Who was this man?
Yaémon felt sure that he was about to learn something of interest. Kuma
was given his instructions. "Go daily to the shop of this man and
receive his report. As to the _samurai_ in question be circumspect.
Evidently he is no ordinary person. A _samurai_ is to be summoned, not
disgraced by arrest--if he is a _samurai_." So Kuma with several aides
established himself in the rear of To[u]kichi's shop. The man not having
put in an appearance for several weeks, the wait, if uncertain, was soon
rewarded. On the 25th day of the 3rd month (May) he presented himself.
Kuma recognized him at once by the description; sooner than To[u]kichi,
who was engaged in filling his little shells with the marvellous salve.
The officer's decision was prompt. At a call To[u]kichi turned from his
drugs. "Ah! the honoured Sir. And the arm, does it honourably
progress?"--"Progress could not be better. This is probably the last
visit." In replying the man eyed To[u]kichi with some astonishment. The
latter made his bows, first to the newcomer, then to the indefinite rear
of the establishment. "Indeed the drug is all that is claimed for it.
The wound being poisoned, at one time it looked as if the hand, nay arm,
must go. These House doctors are notoriously good for nothing. Just as
nothing can surpass your product, good leech. Here is money for two
shells of its virtues." He held out a silver _bu_.[13] Busied with his
preparations To[u]kichi looked in vain toward the rear apartment. After
as long delay as he could contrive he passed the shells and a heap of
copper change over to the customer. As soon as the latter had left the
shop To[u]kichi bolted for the rear. Kuma was gone. His aides were
calmly smoking their pipes and drinking the poor tea (_bancha_) of
To[u]kichi.

Kuma had little trouble in following his man to Okachimachi in Shitaya.
He found near by a shop for the sale of everything, from tobacco to
_daikon_ (radish), both odoriferous, yet lacking perfume. Said Kuma--"A
question or so: this tall _samurai_, an oldish man, who lives close by;
who is he?" The woman in charge hesitated. Then dislike overcame
discretion. "Ah! With the hand wrapped in a bandage; his name is Sakurai
Kichiro[u] Tayu. Truly he is a bad man. That he should quarrel with his
own class is no great matter. Maimed as he is, thrice report has been
made to the guard house, but in each case he has escaped further
process. He is a dreadful fellow; one who never pays a debt, yet to whom
it is dangerous to refuse credit. Already nearly a _ryo[u]_ is due to
this Echigoya. It has been the bad luck to support him and his family
during the past six months." Said Kuma--"Thus maimed, to hold his own in
quarrels he must be a notable fencer as well as brawler. Was the wound
so received?"--"Iya! That is not known. Some quarrel at the New Year's
festivities probably was the cause. Before that time he was sound
enough." She laughed. "He has two friends; Kahei San and Miemon San.
They are birds of a feather; and all partly plucked. Perhaps they
quarrelled in company, but if so have made it up. Sakurai San is a match
for the two others." She looked at Kuma, to see if he had more to say.
Indifferent he picked out a strand of tobacco. "He shouldered this
Go[u]bei into the ditch close by here. Fortunate is it to have escaped
worse injury." Satisfied with his inquiries he took his way in haste to
his master. The eyes of Yaémon and his aid shone with enjoyment. Surely
they had the men of the Shiba Kirido[u]shi.

Magomé Yaémon at once sought out the _machibugyo[u]'s_ office. His
lordship heard the report. "Different disorders require different
treatment. Of two of these men this Gemba knows something. The other man
is hard to place, and evidently not so easy to deal with." Two
_do[u]shin_ and _yakunin_ were sent at once to the addresses indicated.
To capture Nakagawa Miemon and Imai Kahei was an easy task. The
_do[u]shin_ and _yakunin_ sent to the house of Sakurai formed a band of
twenty men. The house surrounded, without ceremony the officer and an
aid entered. "On the lord's mission: Sakurai San is wanted at the office
of Matsuda Dono. If resistance be made it will be necessary to use the
rope. Pray accompany me." Sakurai Kichiro[u] divined the object of the
arrest. "The affair at the Kirido[u]shi has been scented out. The manner
of that rascally drug seller was strange to-day." The officer had
planted himself right before the sword rack. Sakurai could neither kill
anybody, nor cut belly. He turned to his wife. "There is a matter on
hand to be explained. Absence will probably be prolonged. Already the
day is far advanced.... Ah! Is it Kichitaro[u]?" A boy of seven years
had rushed into the room. "Pretty fellow!... Honoured Sir, be patient.
The separation is no short one. No resistance is made. We go the same
road.... Taro[u]; rude fellow! Salute the gentleman." The boy obeyed,
with grave ceremony and a hostility which divined an unpleasant mission.
"Your father leaves you. It is now the time to obey the mother in all
she says. Remember well, or the end will be a bad one." Wife and child
clung to him, frightened and now weeping. It was an arrest; their
mainstay was being taken from them. In the last caresses he had time to
bend down and whisper to O'Ren--"In the toilet box is a scroll sealed
up. All is there explained. Read and destroy it. In later days at
discretion let our son know." Roughly he pushed woman and boy aside.
With rapid stride he reached the entrance. The _yakunin_ confronted him.
He laughed and waved a hand. "There is no resistance. We go the same
road." The _do[u]shin_ permitted the laxity of discipline. He had his
orders.

Meanwhile the examination of the other two men was in progress at the
office of the _machibugyo[u]_. As the biggest fool of the two, Nakagawa
Miemon was the first summoned to the presence of Matsuda Dono. Said the
Judge[14]--"Nakagawa Uji, there is a slight inquiry to make. How were
those scars on the face come by? These are marks of wounds not long
since received. Consider well and remember." The tone of menace
staggered Miemon. He had anticipated some rebuke for slight infraction
of the peace, not unusual with these men. "Naruhodo! Has the Shiba
Kirido[u]shi matter cropped up?" He hesitated--"The story is a long one,
and a foolish one. To weary the honoured ears...." Matsuda Gemba caught
him up with impatient gesture. "Answer the question, and truly. Nakagawa
Miemon is noted neither for judgment nor sobriety." The man caught up
the last phrase as a cue. Eagerly he spoke, the doors of the jail
opening wide for exit--"So it is indeed. Wine never benefited man; much
less a _samurai_. Hence, with Kahei and Sakurai Uji, it was decided to
forswear wine forever. It was determined to make a pilgrimage to Kompira
San. There the vow of abstinence was to be taken; on its holy ground.
All went well. We met at Nihonbashi. Alas! At the Kyo[u]bashi the
perfume of a grog shop reached our noses. The vow had not yet been
taken. The ground was not holy. Just one last drink before setting out.
But the Buddha was unfavourable. Once begun, the drinking was adjourned
to a cook shop. There the bout continued all day. Wine lent us the wings
of _tengu_. We travelled the road to Kompira San in a dream. In the
progress Kahei and this Miemon quarrelled. Swords were drawn, and we cut
each other. These wounds on head and face were the portion of this
Miemon. Kahei had his hand nearly severed. Sakurai San, who was asleep,
aroused by the noise, sprang up to part us. He is a man to be feared;
but in my rage I sank my teeth in his hand. The bite of man or beast is
poison. His wound was worse than that of either of us."

Gemba Dono was in conversation with his chamberlain. He let Miemon talk
away. He was not one to say too little. As barely having listened he
asked--"When was this fight? The day of the vow and journey to Kompira?
Truly the result has been the vengeance of offended deity."--"The
twelfth month tenth day," naturally replied Miemon. Gemba forced him to
repeat the answer. Several times he put the query in different forms.
Miemon, fool that he was, stuck to the date. Then said the
magistrate--"Miemon, you are a liar. Moreover, you are a murderer. On
the 13th day, on going up to the castle, this Gemba had converse with
your lord. At that time Nakagawa Miemon was summoned to carry out a
mission. As a man of whom report had been made you were noted well. At
that time you had no wound.... Tie him up, and take him away." The
_yakunin_ fell on him from all sides. In a trice he was trussed up and
removed.

Then appeared Imai Kahei. Kahei was cunning, but also a coward. To the
questions of the _machibugyo[u]_ he procrastinated in his answers,
confused them all he could. What had Miemon said? "He spoke of the
eloquence of Imai San; of Kahei Uji as the clever man, the one to tell
the tale properly. Now let us have the true statement of the case." Such
was Gemba's reply. It was flattering. Unable to help himself Kahei set
sail on his sea of lies. "We all like wine...."--"Ah! After all you are
agreed." Gemba smiled pleasantly. Kahei took courage--"But wine costs
money. Together we went to Kuraya Jibei, a money-lender living at
Kuramae no Saka, as is well known." Gemba nodded assent. "Of him two
_ryo[u]_ were borrowed, on agreement to repay ten _ryo[u]_ as interest
within a month. The nearest grog shop was sought, and it was the hour of
the rat (11 P.M.) before the return was started. At the Teobashi a band
of drunkards was encountered. Without cause these men forced a quarrel
on us. Thus was the hand of Kahei nearly severed. This is the
truth."--"And what was the date of this money bond?" Imai hesitated. He
had caught a glimpse of the drug seller To[u]kichi on being brought into
the place. Without doubt the Kirido[u]shi affair was in question. He
must antedate his wound. "Kahei does not remember with certainty.
Perhaps it was the seventeenth day; before the Kwannon festival of the
eighteenth day." He mumbled, and was frightened. Said Gemba
sharply--"Speak distinctly; the seventeenth day?"--"Hei! Hei! Some time
in the last decade of the month; the nineteenth or twentieth day--not
later; not later." Matsuda Gemba almost leaped at him. "Oh, you liar! On
the last day of the year you came, in person, to this Gemba to
anticipate the New Year's gift (_sebo_). At that time you had no wound.
Yet the drug seller sees you next day with maimed hand. It was not at
Teobashi, but at Shiba Kirido[u]shi, that the wound was received.... Tie
him up, and away with him." The _yakunin_ came forward. Imai made a
spasmodic attempt to rise. They threw him down, and in a moment he was
keeping company with Nakagawa Miemon.

Gemba Dono braced himself for the more serious task. So did his
_yakunin_. A glance showed the magistrate that he had mistaken his man.
Sakurai Kichiro[u] came forward with calm and dignity. Making his
ceremonial salutation to the judge he came at once to the point. "What
lies Miemon and Kahei have told, this Kichiro[u] knows not. The fact is
that we three plotted together to rob the fatly supplied purses of the
_banto[u]_ making their rounds in settlement of accounts at the close of
the year. Hence the _banto[u]_ of the Shimaya, Zensuké, lost his money
belt, and a man of the same stamp, one Jugoro[u], was killed. All three
of us are guilty of the murder...." As he would proceed Gemba held up
his hand. "Bring in the other two men. Continue, Kichiro[u]." Said
Sakurai--"Miemon was badly cut about the head and face. Kahei nearly
lost his hand. This Kichiro[u] would have killed the clerk, but the
procession of Geishu[u] Sama came in sight, and recognition was feared.
Of the three hundred and twenty-five _ryo[u]_ secured...." The eyes of
Nakagawa and Imai stood out. Aghast they had followed the confession of
Sakurai Kichiro[u], with full intention to deny its truth. Now they were
in a fury. "What! Three hundred and twenty-five _ryo[u]_! And we had but
ten _ryo[u]_ apiece. You jest, Sakurai Uji.... Oh! The low fellow! The
villain! A very beast! A swine!"

Gemba Dono could ask for nothing more. With smiling face and courtesy
he turned to Sakurai Kichiro[u]. "Why did Kichiro[u] take the three
hundred _ryo[u]_, giving to these fellows such a paltry sum?" Answered
Kichiro[u]--"As deserving no more. They are paltry fellows; little
better than common soldiers (_ashigaru_). But there is more to tell, now
the end is reached. The true name of Sakurai Kichiro[u] is Takahashi
Daihachiro[u], at one time a retainer of Matsudaira Aki no Kami. Pressed
by the money lender Jusuké, I killed him and had the body disposed of by
one Densuké, the cook at the soldiers' quarters of the _yashiki_. This
was in Tenwa 3rd year 5th month (June 1683). Fleeing to avoid arrest the
occupation of writing teacher was taken up at Yu[u]ki in Shimosa.
Densuké, too, had fled, and hither he came as a wandering beggar.
Fearing his tongue I killed him; and mutilating the corpse, threw it
into the castle moat close by. A beggar found dead, no inquiry was
made."--"When did this take place?" asked Gemba. "Just one year
later--Jo[u]kyo[u] 1st year 5th month." He made a little movement.
Nakagawa and Imai broke out into protest at the completeness of this
confession, but Sakurai turned fiercely on them. "Shut up! To undergo
public trial would bring shame on all _kerai_ throughout the land; would
cause people to fear our caste. We three planned the deed and secured
the money." He put his arms behind his back. The _yakunin_, stepping
softly, roped him up almost with respect. A wave of Gemba's hand and the
guilty men were removed. Unable to help themselves, Nakagawa and Imai
made confession to avoid the torture in what was now a hopeless case.
Later the sentences of condemnation were issued. Degraded from their
status the three men were taken to the execution ground of Shinagawa,
and there decapitated.

The wife of Takahashi Daihachiro[u] did not wait these proceedings.
The confession of her husband was in her hands before he himself told
everything to Matsuda Gemba. Before night she had decamped with her son.
At eight years of age Kichitaro[u] was placed as disciple (_deshi_) at
the Jo[u]shinji of Fukagawa. Receiving the name of Myo[u]shin he became
the favourite of the rector (_ju[u]shoku_) of the temple. The mother now
became reduced to the greatest penury. For a time she was bawd in the
Honjo[u] Warigesui district. Subsequently she was promoted to the
position of favourite sultana (wife) of her master Toémon, local head of
his profession. Her name now was O'Matsu. When Myo[u]shin was thirteen
years old in some way he was told that she was dead. Henceforth he had
no stay in the world but the worthy priest, who became a second and
better father to him. This treatment found its usual and virtuous
reward. At eighteen years, now a priest and learned in priestly ways, he
took to himself the contents of the temple strong box. Fifty _ryo[u]_
soon disappeared in the company of the harlots of Fukagawa Yagura-Shita.
A prolonged absence of Myo[u]shin aroused the inquiries of the other
monks, and the eyes of the rector were soon opened as to his unworthy
proselyte, the blighted issue of a miserable stock.[15]




CHAPTER VI

NEGOTIATIONS: THE BUSINESS OF A MARRIAGE BROKER (NAKO[U]DO)


The presence of O'Iwa created an upheaval in the Samoncho[u] household.
The wet nurse required brought with her a train of servants. With the
child's growth this was maintained, even increased. The young lady
(Ojo[u]san) found herself graduated into one with a _status_ to
maintain. All the niggardly habits of Matazaémon were thrown to the
winds with the advent of this grandchild. The affection never shown
outwardly to the mother, was lavished on her daughter. At seven years of
age O'Iwa underwent the common enough infliction of smallpox. It showed
itself on the anniversary day of O'Mino's death, and the child's
sickness afforded but mutilated rites for the memorial service of the
mother. Matazaémon would have abandoned all his duties, himself to nurse
the child. O'Naka loved O'Iwa for self and daughter. She had sense
enough to drive the old man into a corner of the room, then out of it;
and further expostulations sent him to his duties. Who, in those iron
days, would accept such excuse for absence? The child worried through,
not unscathed. Her grandmother's qualifications as nurse have been
mentioned. O'Iwa was a plain girl. She had the flat plate-like face of
her mother. The eyes were small, disappearing behind the swollen
eyelids, the hair was scanty, the disease added its black pock marks
which stood thick and conspicuous on a fair skin. Otherwise she was
spared by its ravages, except--

Whatever her looks O'Iwa compensated for all by her disposition. She
had one of those balanced even temperaments, with clear judgment, added
to a rare amiability. Moreover she possessed all the accomplishments and
discipline of a lady. At eleven years Matazaémon unwillingly had sought
and found a place for her in attendance on her ladyship of the great
Hosokawa House. O'Iwa's absence made no difference in his household. The
train of servants was maintained, to be disciplined for her return, to
be ready on this return. Perhaps it was a pleasing fiction to the fond
mind of the aging man that she would return, soon, to-morrow. O'Naka
acquiesced in the useless expense and change in her habits. She always
acquiesced; yet her own idea would have been to make a good housekeeper
of O'Iwa--like herself, to sew, cook, wash, clean--a second O'Mino. She
could not understand the new turn of Matazaémon's mind. As for O'Iwa,
she grew to girlhood in the Hosokawa House, learned all the
accomplishments of her own house and what the larger scale of her new
position could teach her; everything in the way of etiquette and the
polite arts, as well as the plainer tasks of housekeeping, she was
likely ever to be called on to perform. The plain child grew into the
plain woman; perhaps fortunately for her. The _okugata_ (her ladyship)
was a jealous woman. Her spouse was mad on women. Every nubile maid
(_koshimoto_) in the _yashiki_ was a candidate for concubinage. His wife
countered by as hideous a collection of females as her own House and her
lord's retainers could furnish. O'Iwa attracted from the first by her
lack of all physical attraction. His lordship tried to get used to her
with the passage of years--and failed. He could not stomach the
necessary advances. But the girl's admirable temper and even judgment
secured the esteem of all. These latter qualities captivated the whole
household. It was O'Iwa who performed all duties for her ladyship, took
them in charge as her substitute. For the first time in his life Oki no
Kami found something in a woman apart from her sex. When the time came
for O'Iwa to depart, the regret of lord and lady was substantially
expressed in their gifts. But his lordship had to admit failure. Not a
retainer could be found willing to take the daughter of Tamiya as wife.
So far O'Iwa's mission at the _yashiki_ had failed. O'Naka knew this.
Matazaémon never gave it thought; so glad he was to get her back. He
received the honoured words and presents with humble and delighted
thanks. O'Iwa reentered her home, a recovered jewel. She was the
Ojo[u]san, the lady daughter. A first step of hers was gradually to get
rid of a good part of the superfluous train. O'Iwa was a very practical
girl.

Matazaémon was now old and ill. He was nearing his seventieth year. The
one idea in his head was the _muko_, the son to be adopted as husband of
the heir of the House; the mate to be secured for O'Iwa, and the
posterity to be secured for his House. As a little girl O'Iwa had been
much courted--in fun. Watanabé Juzo[u], Natsumé Kyuzo[u], Imaizumi
Jinzaémon, many others the growing "sparks" of Samoncho[u] and
roundabout, could not forbear this amusement with the little
"_Bakémono_" (apparition). Of their ill intent O'Iwa knew nothing.
Indeed a short experience with O'Iwa disarmed derision. Most of the
unseemly lovers came genuinely to like the girl, unless inherent malice
and ugliness of disposition, as with Natsumé and Akiyama Cho[u]zaémon,
made their sport more than mere pastime. But as grown men they could not
face the results of the final step, and no parent was harsh enough to
graft his unwilling stock on O'Iwa's persimmon trees. The girl was
clever enough to know this. It was Ho[u]ei 6th year (1709) and she was
now twenty-six years old. It was indirectly at her suggestion that
Matazaémon sought the aid of Kondo[u] Rokuro[u]bei. This man lived just
behind the large inclosure of the Sainenji, on the hill slope which dips
steeply down to the Samégabashi. The relationship was very distant at
best; but with nearer relatives in general, and with Yoémon his brother
in particular, the master of Tamiya had deadly feud. To them he would
not turn to find a husband for O'Iwa.

Thus it happened that one day in the seventh month (August)
Rokuro[u]bei was awaiting the appearance of Yamada Cho[u]bei. He really
knew little about the man, but Cho[u]bei at one time had been resident
in the ward. He had undergone vicissitudes, and now was a dealer in
metals and a kind of broker in everything under the sign of Musashiya.
He had a wide acquaintance over Edo in his different businesses, and was
the easy and slip-shod means by which Rokuro[u]bei would avoid the more
arduous part of the task laid on him by Matazaémon. Cho[u]bei was not
long in putting in an appearance. All affairs were gifts of the gods to
a man who lived on wind. Kazaguruma Cho[u]bei--Windmill Cho[u]bei--he
was called. His flittings were so noiseless and erratic, just like the
little paper windmills made for children, that the nickname applied
exactly fitted him. The maid in announcing him showed no particular
politeness. "Wait here a moment.... Danna Sama (master), Cho[u]bei San,
the metal dealer, requests an interview."--"Ah! Pass him here at
once.... Is it Cho[u]bei? Please sit down." Cho[u]bei had followed
almost on the girl's footsteps. She drew aside to make room for him,
then flirted out in haste. Poverty and dislike had no influence in
Yotsuya in those days. She seemed to scent the man.

Cho[u]bei looked with envy at the comfortable Rokuro[u]bei. The day was
hot. The thin _kimono_ fallen about his loins, the latter's garb was a
pair of drawers and a thin shirt. He sat looking out on the garden, with
its shade of large trees, its shrubbery and rock work. Everything was
dripping with the water industriously splashed to this side and to that
by the serving man. The tea was brought and Kondo[u] at last remembered
that he had a guest. As he turned--"It is a long time since a visit has
been paid. Deign to pardon the intrusion." Cho[u]bei sighed in making
this remark. The irony was lost on his fat host. As Rokuro[u]bei seemed
unwilling, or hardly to know how to impart the subject concerning which
he had summoned him, Cho[u]bei continued--"And the honoured health, is
it good? The honoured business, is it on some matter of moment that
Cho[u]bei is summoned?" Rokuro[u]bei woke up under the direct question.
He, too, sighed. Cho[u]bei was noted for a greed which inspired fear.
For money he would do anything. "Blindman Cho[u]bei" had been his
nickname of old days in the ward. Kondo[u] remembered this. He liked
money, too. It brought in so much comfort. He hated to part with
comfort. It was to be a question between himself and Cho[u]bei how much
of his hard-earned commission was to be parted with. This last thought
completely aroused him. "It is a matter of securing a _muko_. This
Rokuro[u]bei is the one charged with the task. As a son-in-law outside
the ward is desired, no one has wider circulation and better
opportunities than Cho[u]bei San. Hence the desire for a consultation."
Cho[u]bei whistled inwardly. Outside the ward! What was wrong with the
case. Here was coin to be turned up by the circumspect. "Surely there
are young fellows enough in Samoncho[u], fit to be _muko_. Of course
with impediments...."--"It is the daughter of Tamiya; O'Iwa San.
Matazaémon Dono has commissioned this Rokuro[u]bei to secure a _muko_."
Cho[u]bei whistled outwardly. "For O'Iwa San!..."--"She is no beauty, as
Cho[u]bei evidently knows. Wealth compensates for other deficiencies. At
all events his aid is desired."--"For how much?" Cho[u]bei spoke
bluntly. If Rokuro[u]bei had forgotten Cho[u]bei, Cho[u]bei had not
forgotten Rokuro[u]bei. He went on--"To get a price for damaged goods is
no sinecure. Fortunately she is only out of repair on the surface....
Say ten _ryo[u]_?" Kondo[u] laughed scornfully--"And they call Cho[u]bei
'the Blind-man'! Rather is it vision magnified. The entertainment should
be the reward; with what Cho[u]bei collects from the happy bridegroom."
Cho[u]bei replied gravely--"With such a wealthy connection the future of
Kondo[u] Dono is to be envied. Cho[u]bei has to realize his future at
once. Not a _ryo[u]_ less can he afford." Plainly he was in earnest, as
was the long conversation which followed. Finally Cho[u]bei emerged with
partial success, and half the sum named as stipend for his labours.

He began them at once. The next day he was at the metal market in
Kanda. In course of chaffering over wares he never bought--"You fellows
always have some _ro[u]nin_ in train; a fine, handsome fellow for whom a
wife is needed. Application is made. Jinzaémon, you have a
candidate."--"Not for the kind of wife Cho[u]bei San provides." Those
present laughed loudly at the sally. Cho[u]bei did not wink. He
explained. "No bad provision is this one. Rich, with an income of thirty
_tawara_, a fine property in reversion, and but twenty-five years old.
The man therefore must be fit to pose as a _samurai_; able to read and
write, to perform official duty, he must be neither a boy nor a man so
old as to be incapable. Come now! Does no one come forward? _Ro[u]nin_
are to be had. A _ryo[u]_ for aid to this Cho[u]bei."--"Too cheap as an
offer," was Jinzaémon's retort. "A _ro[u]nin_ is one to be handled with
care. Those favoured with acquaintance of the honoured _bushi_ often
part with life and company at the same date. Those without lords are
equally testy as those in quarters." He spoke with the bluntness of the
true Edokko, the peculiar product of the capital; men who were neither
farmers nor provincials, but true descendants of the men of the guild of
Bandzuin Cho[u]bei. He jested, but the subject interested the crowd.
Said one--"Does Cho[u]bei San get the _ryo[u]_ out of groom or bride?
She is a bold wench, unmarried at that age; and none too chaste eh,
Cho[u]bei San? She will provide the husband with wife and child to hand,
or in the making. Or, are matters the other way? Has she been tried and
found wanting? Is she impotent, or deformed; or is Cho[u]bei making
fools of us?" Answered Cho[u]bei slowly--"No; she is a little ugly. The
face round and flat, shining, with black pock marks, making it look like
speckled pumice, rouses suspicion of leprosy. This, however, is not the
case. At all events she is a woman." All were now roaring with
laughter--"A very beauty indeed! Just the one for Cho[u]bei's trade! Too
honied was his speech. He would market anything. But in this market it
is a matter of hard cash; without credit. This is a bit of goods too
wilted. Even Cho[u]bei cannot sell it."--"You lie!" said Cho[u]bei in a
towering passion. "At the first hint of ill-fortune threatening wine
supply or pleasure, there is not one of you who would not turn to
Cho[u]bei to find the money needed. Sisters, daughters, wives, aunts ...
mothers are for sale." He was choking with rage. "Sell her? Cho[u]bei
can and will." Angered by the final item on his family list, a man
nearby gave him a sharp poke in the back. Others voiced resentment,
perhaps would have given it material form. The canal was spoken of.
Cho[u]bei took the hint. He did not wait for a ducking. At a sharp pace
he trotted off toward his tenement at Asakusa Hanagawado[u]. For a while
he would avoid the metal market. He regretted his display of temper. It
was in the necessities of other trades that he found the material of his
own, and flourished.

In plain terms Kazaguruma Cho[u]bei was a pimp for the Yoshiwara and
kindred quarters. His other occupations were mere channels accessory to
this main business. Hence his seasons of increase and decline. Just now
he was in a period of decline. His eagerness in this Tamiya affair was
sharpened. Pushing his way through the Kuramae of Asakusa suddenly a
hopeful light came into his eye. Abruptly he made his way to the side of
the roadway. Here boarding covered the ditch, removing the occupant of a
booth erected thereon, and would-be clients, from the passing stream of
humanity. There was a table in the booth, and on it were several books,
a vessel containing water, brushes (_fudé_), scrolls for writing, and a
box containing divining sticks. It was the stand of a strolling
fortune-teller. At the time the occupant was engaged in gathering
together his professional apparatus, with the evident purpose to decamp.
Cho[u]bei did not delay in accosting him. "Ah! The Sensei;[16] Kazuma
Uji finds the day too hot to pry into the future. Does the Sensei leave
his clients to their fate, or have the clients abandoned the Sensei?
Deign to come along with Cho[u]bei. Perhaps he, too, can tell fortunes.
At all events the wife has been forewarned; the bath is ready. It will
put life into both of us." The young man laughed and hastened his
operations, nodding assent--"Thanks are felt, Cho[u]bei San. Indeed this
Kazuma has but to continue the art of prophecy if he would foretell his
own fate. No one will buy the future when money is so needed for the
present. Besides this is a pleasure ground. Men have no hankering to
learn of possible worse luck than being here. All the fools have
died--except their prophet." He shouldered his scanty apparatus, and
with rapid stride the two men pushed their way up the crowded street
toward the great gate of the temple. In his haste Cho[u]bei yet had time
to eye, from time to time, his companion, always gaining encouragement
from the palpable seediness made more plain by a handsome person. The
two were neighbours in a house-row (_nagaya_) of the Hanagawado[u], that
poverty-stricken district along the river close to the great amusement
ground, and furnishing those who perform its baser tasks. On arrival
Cho[u]bei called out--"O'Taki! O'Taki! The bath, is it ready? The
Sensei, Kazuma San, honours us with his company. Make all ready for his
reception.... Sensei, condescend to enter; please come up."

Yanagibara Kazuma dropped his clogs in the vestibule. As he entered the
room--"Pray pardon the intrusion. This Kazuma feels much in the way. He
is continually putting his neighbours of the _nagaya_ to inconvenience;
too great the kindness of Cho[u]bei San and wife." O'Taki laughed
deprecatingly. Truly this was a handsome young man. In this 6th year of
Ho[u]ei (1709) Yanagibara Kazuma was twenty-one years of age. O'Taki was
thirty odd. She appreciated masculine beauty all the more. Cho[u]bei
grunted from heat and the merest trace of discomfiture. He had his
limit, even in his business. Quickly he shook off his _kimono_, and fan
in hand squatted in his loin cloth. "Ah! 'Tis hot beyond endurance.
Business is bad--from Yoshiwara to Yotsuya." O'Taki looked up at the
last word. He continued--"The Sensei takes precedence. Kazuma Uji, deign
to enter the bath. All is ready?" His wife nodded assent. Kazuma
followed the example of Cho[u]bei. In a trice he was naked as his mother
bore him. Cho[u]bei burst out into phrases of admiration--"What a
splendid fellow! Ah! Waste of material! If a woman Kazuma San would be a
fortune to himself and to Cho[u]bei.... Taki, note the skin of the
Sensei. It has the texture of the finest paper. How regrettable!" He
drew back for the better inspection of the sum total of his subject's
charms. O'Taki drew closer for the same purpose. Cho[u]bei sighed--"It
is plain enough that Kazuma San is not a woman. An error of Nature!
Somehow the age at which a woman becomes of use, is that at which a boy
becomes a mere burden. He is fit for nothing but to be a
story-teller.... And you, Taki, what are you about?" The lady of his
affections was far advanced in the process of disrobing. She protested.
"Does not the Sensei need aid in the bath? How cleanse the back, the
shoulders. This Taki would aid him."--"Immodest wench!" bellowed
Cho[u]bei. "The Sensei needs no such aid. Why! You ... Taki ... one
would take you for a charcoal ball (_tadon_), so dark your skin. Nay!
For two of them, for a cluster piled in a box, so round the buttocks and
belly. The Sensei wants no aid from such an ugly jade. This Cho[u]bei
can do what is needed; with as much skill and better purpose than a
woman." Kazuma modestly interposed in this incipient quarrel between
husband and wife. "Nay, the matter is of no importance. Kazuma is
grateful for such kindness, but aid is not needed. His arm is long." He
held it out, almost simian in proportion and slenderness, the one
proportional defect of this handsome body. The quarrel of Cho[u]bei and
O'Taki lapsed before his pleasant smile.

Seated over tea said Cho[u]bei--"This Cho[u]bei, too, has claimed to be
a diviner. Don't deny it. The Sensei at one time has been a priest."
Kazuma looked at him with surprise, even misgiving. Explained
Cho[u]bei--"The manner in which the Sensei takes up the cup betrays him;
in both hands, with a little waving of the vessel and shake of the head.
The rust of the priest's garb clings close." Said Kazuma--"Cho[u]bei San
is a clever fellow. It is true. At one time I was priest."--"Whereabouts?"
asked Cho[u]bei. "At the Reigan of Fukagawa," replied the prophet--"Ah!
Reiganji; and later would return to the life of a _samurai_. Such pose and
manner possessed by the Sensei are only gained in good company. He would
reassume the status. This Cho[u]bei was not always as he is. Wine, women,
gambling, have brought him to pimping. The buying of _geisha_ and
_joro[u]_ cost the more as they imply the other two vices. Wife, status,
fortune; all are gone. Such has been Cho[u]bei's fate."--"Not the only
case of the kind," grumbled his partner in concubinage. "And the wife,
what has become of her?"--"None of Taki's affair, as she is no longer an
issue. Would the jade be jealous?" He glowered at her. "But Kazuma San,
this Cho[u]bei is not only diviner, to tell fortunes. He can make them."
Kazuma laughed. "Don't joke. Cho[u]bei San's line of business has already
cost this Kazuma fortune and position."--"To secure a better one. Kazuma
San is a _ro[u]nin_ (without lord), a man of education, and of fine
appearance. He is just the one to become a _muko_."--"In some tradesman's
family?" The _samurai_ spoke with disdain. Said Cho[u]bei eagerly--"No:
Cho[u]bei prophesied the return of Kazuma Uji to his own caste."--"At what
cost?" said Kazuma coolly. "The honour of a _samurai_ cannot stand open
taint. Kazuma has no desire to cut belly at too early a date, to save the
situation for others. Has the woman erred, and is the father's sword
dulled?"--"It is no such case," answered Cho[u]bei. "The parents, rather
grandparents, are fools in pride. The girl is twenty-five years old, rich,
and, one must admit, not too good looking. It is by a mere chance, a
former connection, that the affair comes into Cho[u]bei's hands. As Kazuma
Uji knows, it is not much in his line. Let us share the good luck
together."--"Is she a monster; one of those long-necked, pop-eyed
_rokurokubi_?"--"That can be determined at the meeting," said the cautious
Cho[u]bei. "She is somewhat pock-marked, as with others. It is a matter of
luck. Cho[u]bei's position forces him to fall back on Kazuma San as the
only likely man to recommend. Deign not to refuse to come to his
aid."--"Rich, and granddaughter of people old in years." He eyed Cho[u]bei
quizzically. The latter nodded agreement. "No matter what her looks, this
Kazuma accepts with thanks--unless this be a jest of Cho[u]bei San."
Cho[u]bei slightly coughed--"There is a commission...."--"Ah! Then the
foundation is rock. As to commission, assuredly; Kazuma is not rich, nor
in funds."--"But will be. At ten _ryo[u]_ it is a cheap
affair."--"Agreed," replied the diviner carelessly. "The money will be
paid."--"With the delivery of the goods." Cho[u]bei now was all
gaiety--"Of the Rokurokubi, the monster with sextuple lengthed neck,"
laughed Kazuma Sensei as he took his leave. He was engaged to meet
Cho[u]bei the next day at the house of Kondo[u] Rokuro[u]bei in Yotsuya.




CHAPTER VII

IÉMON APPEARS


In his difficult mission Kondo[u] Rokuro[u]bei had hopes of
Cho[u]bei; but not much more. It was with no small pleasure that he
heard the announcement of his visit the next morning. The maid was a
shade more civil--"Please wait." Kondo[u] was decidedly so. He greeted
Cho[u]bei with an effusion which Cho[u]bei noted. The tea brought, the
two men faced each other over the cups. To Kondo[u]'s inquiring
look--"Honoured master the task is a difficult one." He retailed his
experience at the Kanda market. Kondo[u] was somewhat discomfited. He
had put a different interpretation on the early visit of Cho[u]bei.
Continued the latter--"A difficult task, but not hopeless. Surely five
_ryo[u]_ is very small remuneration." Kondo[u]'s eye lit up. Cho[u]bei
had his man. "It is all this Kondo[u] is qualified to give. Cho[u]bei
knows Tamiya Dono. After all it is he who pays, and Cho[u]bei can
claim but his share. However, the matter is not urgent. A bad turn
with Matazaémon, and O'Naka will be much easier to deal with ...
unless it be Yoémon who interposes." He made a wry face; joined in by
Cho[u]bei. Kondo[u] went on--"It is matter of regret to have troubled
you. The parents of Natsumé Kyuzo[u] show signs of breaking off
present negotiations and coming round to us. This is a matter of
yesterday, and on hearing that the affair of O'Iwa San was definitely
in the hands of Rokuro[u]bei." Cho[u]bei was frightened. Was this the
cause of Kondo[u]'s joy? Had he misinterpreted on his entrance? He put
out a hand, as if to stop the talk of his host. "Deign to allow the
money question to stand as agreed. Such step would put this Cho[u]bei
in an awkward position. The man is found, and soon will be here.
Probably even Kondo[u] Dono will be satisfied."--"Who is he?" asked
Kondo[u].--"One Yanagibara Kazuma. He has practised divination at
Asakusa...."--"A charlatan! A quack doctor! Cho[u]bei, are you mad?"
Rokuro[u]bei pushed back his cushion and his cue in horror. Not a word
did he say of Natsumé Kyuzo[u]. Cho[u]bei smiled. He had been trapped;
but he had detected Kondo[u]. "Don't be alarmed. The man is a
_ro[u]nin_, his divination of small account and due to temporary
stress. Kondo[u] Dono will soon judge of the man by his appearance.
Let the subject of Kazuma San be dropped--with that of Natsumé San.
Our bargain has been made firm." Kondo[u] looked down. He felt a
little injured. Continued Cho[u]bei--"For his man Cho[u]bei cannot
answer if all be known. Pray follow my plan, and precede us to the
house of Matazaémon. He must not see O'Iwa at this juncture. Tamiya
Dono is ill and not visible. The Obasan is wise enough to do as she is
told. Years have drilled that into her. O'Iwa has taken cold. Her hair
is loose and she cannot think of appearing. Make this known when the
time comes to serve the wine. Meanwhile send her off on some mission;
to the house of Akiyama, or that of the newly-wed Imaizumi."--"But the
man must see the girl," protested Kondo[u]. Answered Cho[u]bei--"He
must see the property. It is with that Cho[u]bei intends he shall
become enamoured. He is not to see the girl until she is his wife. To
keep the estate he will cleave to the woman. Trust Cho[u]bei for a
knowledge of men's hearts ... at least that of Yanagibara Kazuma."
Perhaps he spoke a little too plainly. Rokuro[u]bei had a last touch
of conscience--"Cho[u]bei, what manner of man is this one you bring?
What is his real nature? Tamiya is upright as the walls of the Honmaru
(castle). And Yanagibara Kazuma...." Cho[u]bei's brow wrinkled. He was
spared an answer. Said the maid--"Yanagibara Sama would see the
master."--"Show him in at once," said Rokuro[u]bei.

He rose, as much in amazement as in courtesy. Kazuma was a striking
figure as he entered the room. His dress of white Satsuma was of finest
quality, and perfectly aligned. The _haori_ (cloak) was of the
corrugated Akashi crape. In his girdle he wore the narrow swords then
coming into fashion, with finely lacquered scabbards. In person he was
tall, fair, with high forehead and big nose. Slender and sinewy every
movement was lithe as that of a cat. Kondo[u] gasped as he made the
accustomed salutations. "This man for O'Iwa! Bah! A fox has stolen a
jewel." All his compunction and discretion vanished before this unusual
presence. Kazuma gracefully apologized for his intrusion, thus
uninvited. Kondo[u] stammered protests and his delight at the
opportunity of meeting Yanagibara Dono. Cho[u]bei smiled inward and
outward delight at thus summarily removing any too pointed objections of
Kondo[u]. For absolute self-possession in this awkward situation the
younger man easily carried the palm. Kazuma acted as would a man double
his years. Cho[u]bei was not only delighted, but astonished. "Whence had
the Sensei produced all this wondrous get-up? Was he in real fact a
magician?" Kazuma knew, but he was not one to enlighten Cho[u]bei or
anyone else. After talk on general matters the affair of the meeting was
broached. Said Kondo[u] Rokuro[u]bei--"Thus to trouble Yanagibara Dono
requires apology, but the affair is not without advantage. The lady is
the daughter of Tamiya, a _do[u]shin_ and favoured by the Hosokawa
House. This Kondo[u] is honoured in presenting Kazuma Dono in
Yotsuya."--"Nay, fear enters.[17] The honour of this meeting with
Kondo[u] Dono is as great as the intrusion has been unseemly. Deign to
pardon the precipitancy of this Kazuma." Kondo[u] protested in his turn.
Said Cho[u]bei--"The presentation made, doubtless the matter is as good
as concluded. But Tamiya Dono is ill; this visit is unexpected. If
Kondo[u] Dono would deign to precede, and ascertain how matters are at
Tamiya, it would be well." To this Kondo[u] assented. Making his excuses
he set out for Samoncho[u], bubbling over with excitement, and praying
that the matter would have certain issue; and thus establish him for
life on the shoulders of the wealthy Tamiya. Prayers? Indeed he did stop
on the road, one lined with the ecclesiastical structures. Kondo[u] had
too much at stake, not to invoke all likely aid.

With his departure Cho[u]bei began to go into the externals of the
House of Tamiya. As they walked along--"Congenial surroundings." This
was with a grin and a wave of the hand toward the long line of temple
buildings and graveyards they were passing. "Not much savour of present
lodging in Hanagawado[u]. Eh! Kazuma Uji, even Cho[u]bei notes the
difference." He stopped opposite the Gwansho[u]ji and looked across the
way. The fruit was already formed on the trees of Matazaémon's garden.
"Persimmons of a hundred momme (375 grammes) each; twenty cartloads for
the profit of the house at the fall of the year." As they passed in the
entrance on Samoncho[u] he pointed to a store-house. "Stuffed with rice,
from the farms of Tamiya in Kazusa. No husks to be found in it."--"Who
said there were?" said Kazuma testily. His eyes were taking in the wide
proportions of the garden, the spreading roof and eaves of a stately
mansion. As they passed along the _ro[u]ka_ to a sitting room Cho[u]bei
called his attention to the fret work (_rama-sho[u]ji_) between the
rooms, the panelled ceilings, the polished and rare woodwork of
_tokonoma_ (alcoves). A _kakémono_ of the severe Kano school was hung in
the sitting room alcove, a beautifully arranged vase of flowers stood
beneath it. Matazaémon could not use his legs, but his hands were yet
active. Of his visitors he knew nothing; least of all of Cho[u]bei.
Kondo[u] Rokuro[u]bei appeared. With him was an old lady. O'Naka bowed
to the ground before the proposed son-in-law. She was in a flutter over
the beautiful man destined for O'Iwa. The admirable courtesy of his
manners, the tender softness of voice, robbed her of what little
judgment she had. Her only fear was that the candidate for honours and
the Tamiya would escape.

Said Cho[u]bei--"Asakusa is a long distance; the occasion exceptional.
Cannot the Ojo[u]san favour us by pouring the wine?" The old woman
hummed and hawed. Kondo[u], too, seemed put out. "As a matter of fact
O'Iwa is not presentable. She has taken cold, and just now is in bed.
Perhaps the Obasan will urge her further, now that Yanagibara Uji is
present." O'Naka at once rose, like to an automaton, the spring of which
has been pressed. She disappeared, to return and repeat her lesson.
"Wilful as a child! One would suppose her such. Illness she would
disregard, but her hair is not made up. She cannot think of appearing
before company. Truly she is vexing."--"Not so," defended Cho[u]bei.
"She could not show higher regard than by refusing to appear before a
future husband in careless attire. It is a guarantee of conduct when
married. She is much to be commended for such respect. All women like to
appear well. A man in the neighbourhood, and rice powder and rouge are
at once applied. How neglect such an elaborate structure as the hair?
Trust Cho[u]bei's judgment as to women."

O'Naka thought that he spoke well, but like most men with great
conceit. Kazuma looked out towards the beautiful garden. He took the
chance to smile, for he had soon ascertained that Kondo[u] knew little
about his agent; was in fact a precipitate, testy man. However, he was a
little put out at not seeing the would-be bride. At an opportunity he
stepped out, to see more of the house and its surroundings. Cho[u]bei
came up to him as he stood on the _ro[u]ka_. His voice was coaxing and
pleading. "Is it not a fine prospect--for Kazuma Dono?" His voice hung
on the 'Dono.' "Nay, don't let escape this splendid piece of luck. Long
has Cho[u]bei interested himself in his neighbour. Such a beautiful
exterior should have a proper setting. Marry O'Iwa San and Kazuma Dono
is master of Tamiya. Is it agreed?" Kazuma looked down in thought. At
his age there are ideals of the other sex, hard to put aside. Said
he--"Not to see the lady.... Is she so horrible?" Cho[u]bei protested.
"Not so! The lady is a mere item, well fitted to go with this fine
house, this beautiful garden, these store-houses filled with goods.
Look: Tamiya Dono is a man of double rations. The property has _nagaya_
for attendants. For long this has not been used. Tamiya will not rent it
out. It will be so much revenue added to the stipend of the House, and
will replace the old man's uncertain income from his accomplishments as
master of _hanaiké_ and _cha-no-yu_." Kazuma looked around, following
the pointing finger of Cho[u]bei. He was in sad straits. His only future
was this position of a _muko_. No matter what the woman might be, there
was compensation. To Cho[u]bei's direct question he made answer--"Yes."

The affair of the marriage suffered no delays. Cho[u]bei had struck
home. Kazuma was so impressed with the surroundings, especially after a
return to his own miserable quarters, that the matter of the interview
took a minor place to the inspection of his future property. Within the
week he had removed to the house of Kondo[u] Rokuro[u]bei. The latter
introduced him to his future associates in the ward by a succession of
fish and wine dinners dear to the heart of the men of Nippon. These
neighbours were astonished at the future son-in-law of the Tamiya. This
man was to be the husband of the O'Baké? Was he mad, or drunk? Perhaps
the latter, for neither themselves nor Kazuma had the opportunity to be
particularly sober during this period of festivity. Of course there was
an introduction to Matazaémon, the other principal involved. As Kondo[u]
carefully explained, no set date could be made for this interview.
Tamiya Dono was ill, and to be seen at a favourable time. As ill luck
would have it, on the very day the interview was permitted O'Iwa San
received an urgent summons from the Okugata of the Hosokawa House. This
could not be disregarded, and her absence on the second occasion was
easily explained and condoned. Kondo[u] certainly made no effort, and
Kazuma no suggestion, for a meeting in the three days intervening before
the formal marriage.

At evening the guests met in the reception rooms of Tamiya. In a private
apartment were Kondo[u] Rokuro[u]bei and his wife, O'Iwa, and Iémon. The
latter name had been assumed by Kazuma on his formal registration in the
Tamiya House. It was Cho[u]bei who had purchased the _wataboshi_, or
wadded hood, of floss silk worn by the bride on this great occasion of
her life. Iémon could see but little within its depths, except the
shining light of her countenance. Joy perhaps? At least this curiosity
was soon to be satisfied. Nine times--three times three--were the _saké_
cups drained. Kondo[u] Rokuro[u]bei joined the hands of the train,
exhorting them to mutual forbearance, O'Iwa to unquestioning obedience
to the husband. He pattered over the maxims of the Do[u]jikun of Kaibara
Yekken in this strange case, as he had done twenty times before with
favourable results. Yekken's book was comparatively recent, only a few
decades old, and the woman's guide. Truly the position of the
_nako[u]do_ was no easy one, if it was to bring him at odds with either
House involved. He felt complacent. This pair at least presented less
complications in that line than usual. What there was of doubtful issue
came now to the test. At this crisis he cast an eye to the _ro[u]ka_
(verandah) to see that Cho[u]bei really was at hand as promised. Then
the strings of the _wataboshi_ were loosed. The hood concealing the face
of O'Iwa was removed.

Iémon rose to his feet as if impelled by springs; then hurriedly he sat
again with some mumbled excuse and trembling hands. He could not take
his eyes from the shining white of the face before him, the glazed
smooth surface left in many places between the black of the pock marks.
The removal of the hood had somewhat disarrayed the hair, leaving the
broad expanse of forehead more prominent, the puffed heavy eyelids in
the face more conspicuous. In the depths shone two tiny points, the
eyes. Indeed, as Cho[u]bei afterwards described it, eyelids and eyes had
the appearance of _kuzumanju_, the dumplings of white rice paste with
the black dots of dark brown bean paste sunk deep in the centre. Never
had O'Iwa appeared to such disadvantage. She was now engaged in removing
the white garment, to appear in her proper array as bride and wife.
Iémon took advantage of this absence to step to the _ro[u]ka_. In
leaving the room Kondo[u] had given a wink to Cho[u]bei. Iémon almost
ran into him. He seized him by the arm. The young man's voice was
excited. He spoke in a whisper, as one who could barely find speech.
With satisfaction Cho[u]bei noted that he was frightened, not angered.
"What is that? Who is that creature?" were the first words of Iémon.
Replied Cho[u]bei coldly--"That is the wife of Tamiya Iémon; O'Iwa San,
daughter of Matazaémon Dono; your wife to eight thousand generations."
Then roughly--"Deign, Iémon San, not to be a fool. In the purchase of
cow or horse, what does the buyer know of the animal? Its real qualities
remain to be ascertained. O'Iwa San is ugly. That much Cho[u]bei will
admit. She is pock-marked, perhaps stoops a little. But if the daughter
of the rich Tamiya, a man with this splendid property, had been a great
beauty, this Iémon would not have become the _muko_ of Tamiya, the
future master of its wealth. What qualification had he for such a
position--a diviner, a man whose pedigree perhaps would not stand too
much search." He looked keenly at Iémon, and noted with satisfaction how
the last thrust had gone home. Cho[u]bei must know more of Iémon,
ex-Kazuma. He determined on that for the future.

He continued--"Withdrawal at this juncture would merely create scandal.
Matazaémon is not so bereft of friends that such a step would not cause
serious displeasure in high quarters. The insult would find an avenger.
Then consider please: the old man is kept alive by the anxiety to see
his granddaughter established in life, the line of the Tamiya assured.
He will die within the month. If the old woman hangs on too long"--he
halted speech for a moment, then coldly--"give her lizard to eat. A
diviner, doubtless Iémon San knows Kondo[u] Rokuro[u]bei by this time.
He will never prejudice the man who holds in his hands the purse of the
Tamiya. Iémon San and O'Iwa San are left alone. Good luck to you,
honoured Sir, in the encounter. In this Cho[u]bei a counsellor and
friend always is to be found; and one by no means lacking experience of
the world. As for the woman, she is your wife; one to take charge of the
house and affairs of Iémon Dono is to hand. No other _rusu_[18] could be
found so earnest in duty and so cheap, as O'Iwa San. Take a concubine.
This Cho[u]bei will purchase one for you; such a one as will be the
object of envy and desire to the whole of young Edo. His opportunities
in that line are exceptional. Come! To turn on the lights. On our part
at least there is nothing to conceal." Iémon did not pay attention to
the hint. The one thought harassing him must out--"lop-sided and--a
leper!" He spoke with despair and conviction, eyes fastened on
Cho[u]bei, and such a frightened look that even Cho[u]bei had pity. One
foot in the room he turned back. "That is not so--absolutely." Iémon
could not disbelieve the earnest testimony. Said Cho[u]bei--"The wounds
of smallpox were no trivial ones. In healing the scars were such in
places as form over burns. Hence the shining surface. Positively there
is no leprous taint in Tamiya." He was gratified by the sigh which came
from Iémon, sign of the immense weight lifted off the young man's mind.
"Bah! leave things to the future, and--enjoy the present. O'Iwa cannot
grow ugly with age. So much is gained. What difference will her looks
make to Iémon thirty years hence? She is a woman. Make a child on her.
Then you are free to turn elsewhere."

At once he began to place lights everywhere, as a sign to Kondo[u] that
all was well. This worthy came forward with other guests, to
congratulate the Tamiya House on being once more in young and vigorous
hands. It was Iémon himself who gave the signal to retire. How matters
went alone with his bride has reference to one of those occasions over
which the world draws the veil of decency. In the morning O'Iwa arose
early to attend to the matutinal needs of her spouse. The ablutions
performed, Iémon sat down to tea, as exquisite and exquisitely served as
in any dream in literature of how such ceremony of the opening day
should be performed. Then the morning meal was brought, under the same
supervision of this woman, as expert in all the technique of her craft
as she was ugly in feature; and that was saying much. Iémon watched her
movements in the room with curiosity, mixed with a little pain and
admiration. He was quick to note the skill with which she concealed the
slight limp, due to the shrinking of the sinews of one leg and causing
an unevenness of gait. It was a blemish in the little quick movements of
a woman of surpassing grace; who by art had conquered disease and an
ungainly figure.

O'Iwa had left the room for a moment to get flowers to place in the
vases, offering to the _hotoké_ (Spirits of the departed) in the
Butsudan. On his return Iémon held the _ihai_ (memorial tablets) in his
hands. A priest, these had at once attracted his notice. "Kangetsu
Shinshi; Kangetsu Shimmyo[u]; O'Iwa San, these people have died on the
same day of the month--and the year?"--"Is on the back of the _ihai_,"
replied O'Iwa. "No; it is not a case of suicide together." Then seeing
his evident curiosity she motioned him to sit as she poured tea, ready
for a long story. With its progress voice and manner grew more strained
and earnest. She never took her eyes from the _tatami_ (mats). "The
tablets are those of the father and mother of this Iwa. My mother's name
was Mino. Daughter of Tamiya she acted badly with my father Densuké, a
mere servant in the house. This Densuké was a good man, but his status
of _chu[u]gen_ made my grandfather very angry. He drove the twain from
the house. Thus deprived of means to live, my father took a position as
cook in the _yashiki_ of a great noble. Here he was frightened into
becoming the tool of a very wicked man. Having killed an usurer this man
forced my father to dispose of the body under penalty of death if he
refused. The body being placed in a cloth, my father had carried it to
his house. During his short absence my mother's curiosity led her into
untying the bundle. Her screams aroused the neighbourhood. As they
entered she was seized with convulsions, and gave birth to this Iwa,
thus brought into the world together with the exposure of the crime. My
father, doubtless warned by the crowd, fled from Edo. My mother had but
time to tell her story to the _kenshi_. Then she died. A year later to
the day my father's dead body was found floating in the castle moat,
near the town of Yu[u]ki in Shimosa. A beggar man, but little inquiry
was made into the crime. For long the cause and the criminal were
unknown. Then a _banto[u]_ was robbed in the Shiba Kirido[u]shi; his
companion was killed. The criminals were traced, and on confession were
put to death. The leader and most wicked of them also confessed to the
murder of the usurer Jusuké and to that of my father Densuké. My father
had met him again in Yu[u]ki town, and had aroused in him fear of
denunciation of past crimes. He spoke of 'this Densuké' as a
superstitious, haunted fool; thus in his wickedness regarding my
father's remorse and desire to clear up the strange affair. The
execution of this man removed all chance of my avenging the deaths of
father and mother on himself. But he has left behind a son. The one wish
of this Iwa is to meet with Kichitaro[u]; to avenge on him the
wickedness of his father Takahashi Daihachiro[u]." Iémon at first had
followed in idle mood her story. With the development of the details he
showed an attention which grew in intensity at every stage. With the
mention of the name of Takahashi Daihachiro[u] he gave a violent start.
Yanagibara Kazuma, Iémon Tamiya--what were these but names to cover this
Kichitaro[u], the one-time priest Myo[u]shin of the Jo[u]shinji at
Reigan Fukagawa, and son of Daihachiro[u].

Strange was this retributory fate which had brought these two into the
most intimate relations of husband and wife. When Iémon could control
his voice he said--"That O'Iwa San should have this feeling in reference
to the wicked Daihachiro[u] can be understood. But why such hatred
toward this Kichitaro[u]? Surely the boy is not to be held guilty of the
father's offence!"--"That is a man's way of reasoning," answered O'Iwa.
"A woman, ignorant and foolish, has but her feelings to consult. To
seven births this Iwa will clutch and chew the wicked son of a wicked
father. Against Kichitaro[u] is the vow made." She raised her head.
Iémon turned away shuddering. She had aged into a hag. The shining face,
the marks like black spots in pumice standing out, the mere dots of eyes
in their puffy bed, the spreading mouth with its large shining
teeth--all turned the plain gentle girl into a very demon. The
certainty, the intensity, of a malignant hate was driven into Iémon. He
was so frightened that he even nodded assent to her last words. The
gentle voice of O'Iwa added--"Iwa is ugly; perhaps annoys by the tale.
Leave the affair to her and to the enemy. To Iémon she is bound for two
existences. Deign to drop all formality; call her Iwa, and condescend to
regard her with affection." And Iémon covenanted with himself so to do.
The present should compensate for the past. But in the days which
followed O'Iwa sat on him as a nightmare. He felt the impress of her
teeth at his throat, and would wake up gasping. Time made the situation
familiar. He carefully lulled her into a blind admiration and belief in
her husband Iémon. There seemed no likelihood of O'Iwa learning the
truth; or believing it, if she did.[19]




CHAPTER VIII

IF OLD ACQUAINTANCE BE FORGOT


Matazaémon's illness justified all the predictions of Cho[u]bei. In the
course of the month it was plain that his last hold on life was rapidly
weakening. In that time Iémon had won golden opinions from household and
neighbours. His face was beautiful, and this they saw. His heart was
rotten to the core, and this he kept carefully concealed. The incentive
of his fear of O'Iwa kept up the outward signs of good-will. He found
this easier with the passage of the days. Plain as she was in face and
figure, no one could help being attracted by the goodness of O'Iwa's
disposition. Iémon, in his peculiar situation, placed great hopes on
this, even if discovery did take place. Day following day he began to
discount this latter contingency. To a feeling of half liking, half
repugnance, was added a tinge of contempt for one so wrapped in her
immediate surroundings, whose attention was so wholly taken up with the
matter in hand. She easily could be kept in ignorance, easily be
beguiled.

One day Iémon was summoned to the old man's bedside. He was shocked at
the change which had taken place in a few hours. Propped upon pillows
Matazaémon would speak a few last words. With a shade of his old
impertinent official smile and manner--"The Tamiya is to be
congratulated on its great good fortune in the entrance of one so well
qualified by appearance and manners to uphold its reputation. Deign,
honoured Muko San, to accept the thanks of this Matazaémon. All else has
been placed in the hands of Iémon--goods, reputation, granddaughter."
Iémon bowed flat in acknowledgment and protest at the good-will
expressed. Continued Matazaémon--"There is one matter close to the old
man's heart. Concerning that he would make his last request to the
admirable heart of Iémon. Iwa is a plain girl. The end of time for man,
and the carping comment of neighbours come to his ears, have opened the
eyes of Matazaémon to the truth. Great has been the favour in
disregarding this plainness and taking her to wife. Everything is in the
hands of Iémon San. Consider her happiness and deign to use her well.
Abstain if possible from taking a concubine. At all events conceal the
fact from Iwa, if it be deigned to keep such company. Plainness and
jealousy go together. Faithful and upright, such a disposition as hers
is not to be strained on that point. She would be very unhappy. Better
the light women of Shinjuku Nakacho[u], than one who takes the place of
the wife. Condescend to remember this last request of Tamiya
Matazaémon." He clasped the hand of Iémon, and tears were in his eyes as
he spoke. Iémon, too, was affected. It almost frightened him to be left
alone with O'Iwa. "Deign not to consider such unlikely contingency. The
amiability of O'Iwa is compensation for the greatest beauty. Who could
think of injuring her in any way? Perhaps a child soon will be the
issue. With this in mind condescend to put aside all gloomy thoughts.
Concentrate the honoured will on life, and complete recovery to health
will follow. Such, indeed, is the daily prayer of this Iémon at the
Myo[u]gyo[u]ji."

Matazaémon smiled faintly--with gratification or grimness? Perhaps
death unseals the vision. Often indeed did Iémon present himself at the
family temple; he the substitute for the Master of Tamiya. But as often
did his feet return by the diametrically opposite direction, running the
gauntlet of the charms of the frail beauties of Nakacho[u]. Iémon held
on to the hand of Matazaémon, swearing and forswearing himself with the
greatest earnestness and the best of intentions. Suddenly he raised his
head. The emotion aroused by the interview had been too much for the old
man's fluttering heart. His head had slipped down sideways on the
pillow. A little stream of dark bitter refuse flowed from the mouth and
choked him. He was dead.

Great was the grief of wife and grandchild; great was the importance of
Iémon, now in very fact Master of Tamiya. Whether or not he followed the
advice of Cho[u]bei, and gave the old woman _tokagé_ (lizard); whether
her constant small journeys to the houses of neighbours, reciting a
litany of praise of this wondrous son-in-law; whether the loss of the
companion of so many years wore out the feeble frame; it is fact that
O'Naka followed her lord before the maple leaf turned red. Again the
Tamiya was the scene of the funereal chanting of the priest. The corpse
removed with the provision for the guests and watchers at the wake, the
seventh night of the death observed, with this removal of the deceased
spirit from the scenes of its former activities Iémon could turn himself
without impediment to the life of the future. Outward change there was
none. He was the same kind and affectionate husband as of former days.
Neighbours, anticipating some change of manner, were still louder in
their praises. One day there appeared at Tamiya two intimates, Natsumé
Kyuzo[u] and Imaizumi Jinzaémon. "Iémon Uji, a matter of importance
presses. We are on our way to the ward head, Ito[u] Kwaiba Dono. Deign
to go in company. You are known to be an expert at _go_,[20] a game at
which the old man prides himself for skill. He chafes at the presence of
this unknown rival, heard of but not yet tested. A dinner and wine are
at stake. Without Iémon Uji we do not dare to present ourselves.
Condescend to go in company. To know the great man of the ward, the
wealthy Ito[u] Kwaiba, is of advantage even to Tamiya." Iémon laughed
and assented. He was soon dressed for the greater ceremony of a first
visit. All three climbed down into their clogs, and set out for the
house of the Kumi-gashira near Samégabashi.

If Iémon had been impressed by the wealth of Tamiya, he felt
insignificant before that of the head of Yotsuya. Ito[u] Kwaiba was a
man of sixty-four years, retaining much of the vigour of his youth. For
the past ten years he had added _go_ to his twin passions for wine and
women, neither of which seemed to have made any impression on a keenness
of sight which could read the finest print by the scanty light of an
_andon_, teeth which could chew the hard and tough dried _mochi_ (rice
paste) as if bean confection, and an activity of movement never to be
suspected from his somewhat heavy frame. At the name of Tamiya he looked
up with much curiosity, and Iémon thought his greeting rather brusque.
He saluted with great respect--"Truly fear is inspired. For long no
visit has been paid to the honoured head. Coming thus without invitation
is very rude. Intrusion is feared."--"Nay! Nay!" replied Kwaiba,
apparently attracted by the splendid externals of Iémon. "The failure to
visit is reciprocal. In fact, Tamiya and this Kwaiba have been at odds
these many years. Visits had altogether ceased. This, however, is no
matter for the younger generation. But Iémon San is indeed a fine
fellow. So Kwaiba had heard from all he met. Ah! A fellow to put all the
girls in a flutter. He is the very image of this Kwaiba in younger
years. The husbands were little troubled when he was around. The fair
ones were attracted. Well, well: they all had their turn at Kwaiba; and
Kwaiba has stood the pace. He is as good to-day as ever; in some
ways.... And it is a man like Iémon San who has married the--lady of
Tamiya." Iémon knew the term "O'Baké" had nearly slipped out. Knowing
O'Iwa's attractiveness of temperament, feeling touched in his own
conceit, this astonished and satirical reception he met with on every
side nettled him more than a little. Perhaps Kwaiba noted it. With
greatest unction he urged a cushion and at once changed the subject.
"Iémon San is noted as a _go_ player. This Kwaiba is a mere amateur. It
is for him to ask odds in making request for a game.... Ho! Heigh! The
_go_ board and stones!"

Kwaiba and Iémon were the antagonists. Natsumé and Imaizumi sat at the
sides of the board. Kwaiba, confident in his powers, readily accepted
the deprecatory answer of Iémon at its face value. The game was to be on
even terms. Iémon really was an expert of the sixth grade; certainly of
several grades superiority to Kwaiba.[21] The latter's brows knit as his
position rapidly became imperilled. Natsumé was in a ferment. Fish or
wine? If Iémon sought Kwaiba's favour by a preliminary sound thrashing
at his favourite game, the prospects of either were small. He dropped
his tobacco pipe. In picking it up he gave the buttocks of Iémon a
direct and severe pinch. Iémon was too astonished to cry out. His ready
mind sought a motive for this unexpected assault and pain. The face of
Natsumé was unmoved, that of Imaizumi anxious. A glance at Kwaiba's
attitude enlightened him. Politeness and a dinner were at stake. Even
Natsumé and Imaizumi wondered and admired at what followed. The blunder
of Iémon was a stroke of genius, the inspiration of an expert player. It
was a slight blunder, not obvious to the crudeness of Kwaiba; but it
opened up the whole of Iémon's position and put the game in his
antagonist's hands. Kwaiba promptly seized the advantage. His triumphant
glance shifted continually from Iémon to the onlookers, as the former
struggled bravely with a desperate position. Kwaiba won this first game
somewhat easily. A second he lost by a bare margin. In the third he
scored success in a manner to make evident his superiority over a really
expert player. Confident in his championship of the ward, he was all
geniality as at the end he sorted and swept back the _go_ stones into
their polished boxes. "_Go-ishi_ of Shingu; soft as a woman's hands. But
never mind the sex. Now for fish and wine.... However, Hana can serve
the liquor for us." To the servant--"Heigh! Some refreshments for the
honoured guests; and convey the request of Kwaiba to O'Hana San, to be
present."

With the wine appeared O'Hana San. She was a beautiful girl. Of not
more than twenty years, on the graceful sloping shoulders was daintily
set a head which attracted attention and admiration. The face was a pure
oval--of the _uri_ or melon, as the Nipponese class it--with high brow,
and was framed in long hair gathered below the waist and reaching nearly
to her ankles with its heavy luxuriant mass. She was dressed for the hot
season of the year in a light coloured Akashi crape, set off by an _obi_
or broad sash of peach colour in which were woven indistinct and
delicate wavy designs. The sleeves, drawn a little back, showed the arms
well up to the shoulder. Glimpses of a beautifully moulded neck and
bosom appeared from time to time as she moved here and there in her
preparation of the service of the wine utensils. The delicate tissue of
the dress seemed to caress the somewhat narrow hips of a girlish figure.
Every movement was studied and graceful. This O'Hana had belonged to the
Fukadaya at Yagura no Shita of Fukagawa. She had been what is known as
an _obitsuké_ harlot, wearing the _obi_ in the usual form, without the
loose overrobe or _shikaké_ of the common women. "In the period of
Tempo[u] (1830-1843) all Fukagawa harlots were dressed in this manner."
Attracted by her beauty old Kwaiba had ransomed her and made her his
concubine. For nearly two years she had held this position in his house.
In serving the wine she came to the front and knelt before Iémon as
first to receive it. In handing him the tray with the cup she looked
into his face. The start on the part of both was obvious. Some of the
wine was spilled.

Said Kwaiba--"Then Iémon Uji, you know this woman?" His tone was hard
and truculent. It conveyed the suspicion of the jealous old male.
Iémon's former profession stood him in good stead. He had a glib tongue,
and no intention to deny what had been made perfectly obvious--"It is
fact, and nothing to be ashamed of on the part of Iémon; except as to
attendant conditions beyond control. I was a diviner on the public
highway."--"So 'twas heard," grumbled Kwaiba. "Without customers, and
with no use for the diviner's lens but to charr the rafters of the
garret in which you lived." Iémon did not care to notice the attack. He
merely said--"Deign not to find amusement in what really is a serious
matter to one who has to suffer poverty. While seated at the diviner's
stand attention was drawn by a girl coming down the Kuramaé. Slouching
along close by her was a drunken _samurai_. From time to time he lurched
entirely too close to her. Turning unexpectedly her sunshade caught in
his _haori_ (cloak), which thereby was slightly torn. At once he flew
into a great rage. Laying hands on her he showed no disposition to
accept her excuses. 'Careless wench! You have torn my dress. How very
impudent of you. Unless you at once accompany me to the tea house close
by, to serve the wine and please me, pardon, there is none; be sure of
that.' The people had gathered like a black mountain. Nothing was to be
seen but heads. O'Hana San was in the greatest embarrassment, unable to
free herself from the insults and importunities of the drunken fellow.
The _samurai_ was hid under the diviner's garb. Stepping from the stand
I interposed in the girl's behalf, making apology, and pointing out the
rudeness of his behaviour to the drunkard. Instead of becoming calm he
raised his fist and struck me in the face. His condition gave the
advantage without use of arms. Locking a leg in his tottering supports I
threw him down into the ditch. Then with a word to O'Hana San to flee at
once, we disappeared in different directions. The _samurai_ Iémon again
became the diviner. That part of his rôle this Iémon regrets; but a
weapon he could not draw in the quarrel. Later on meeting O'Hana San at
the Kwannon temple of Asakusa thanks were received, for what was a very
trivial service."--"And again renewed," said the beauty, raising her
downcast face to look direct into that of Iémon. Said Kwaiba--"Ah!
That's the tale, is it? A fortunate encounter, and a strange reunion;
but the world is full of such. O'Hana, it comes in most befitting that
opportunity is afforded to favour the rescuer with something of greater
value than thanks. Pray serve him with wine." Then did Kwaiba take the
matter as a man of the world. But he was no fool, "this old _tanuki_
(badger) of a thousand autumns' experience on hill and in dale." He
understood very well that between Iémon and O'Hana there had been a
closer connection than that of mere accident.




CHAPTER IX

LOVE KNOTS


Many were the visits paid by Iémon to contest at _go_ with Ito[u]
Kwaiba. Rapid was the progress of the love affair between a young man
and a young woman, both inspired with a consuming passion for each
other. In former days--something more than two years before--when Iémon
was priest in the Jo[u]shinji of the Reigan district of Fukagawa, and
was spending the money of the _osho[u]_ so freely, he had met O'Hana at
the Fukagawa of Yagura no Shita. Just entering on her career, she at
once captivated him with a permanent passion. It was in her company that
the funds of the temple had been cast to the four winds of heaven. His
love had been fully reciprocated by O'Hana. The one purpose was to
ransom the lady, and then to live together as husband and wife. Such was
the engagement plighted between them. However, the ransom figure was
large. Iémon--or Kazuma at that time, he dropped his priestly name when
out of bounds--had already planned a larger raid than usual on the
ecclesiastical treasury. Warned by O'Hana that his operations had been
discovered, he had sought safety in flight; not without a last tearful
parting with his mistress, and assurance that fate somehow would bring
them again together. The engagement thus entered on was to flourish
under the new conditions.

As to this pursuit of O'Hana, in which the maiden was coy and willing,
the lover circumspect and eager, or at least thought he was, those
around the pair were soon well informed; that is, with the exception of
the most interested--O'Iwa and Kwaiba. The marked neglect which now
ensued O'Iwa took in wifely fashion; and attributing it to some passing
attraction of Shinjuku Nakacho[u], she did not take it to heart as she
would have done if a concubine had been at issue. As for Kwaiba, the
usually astute and prying old man was so immersed in his _go_ as to be
struck blind, deaf, and dumb. The matter coming to the ears of Kondo[u]
Rokuro[u]bei, the worthy gentleman was seriously alarmed. If true, the
old man had indeed reached a parting of the ways, at which he had to
satisfy Iémon, Master of Tamiya, O'Iwa, his ward, and Ito[u] Kwaiba, the
powerful influence in the daily life of all of them. That night there
was a meeting at the house of Kwaiba, a competition in _gidayu_
recitation, dancing, and poetry (_uta_) making. He presented himself in
season at the door of the Tamiya. "Ah! O'Iwa San; and to-night does
Iémon join the company at the house of the _Kumi-gashira_? Rokuro[u]bei
comes from Kawagoé, and perhaps is not too late to find company on the
road."--"Oya! Is it Kondo[u] Sama? Iya! the Danna has but begun his
preparations.... Iémon! The Danna of Yotsuyazaka has come; for company
on the way to Ito[u] Sama's house.... Deign to enter. In a short time
Iémon will be ready." Kondo[u] looked at her quizzically. There was no
sign of distress or misgivings in this quarter. He felt encouraged.
Probably the rumour was false or exaggerated; perhaps it was wholly due
to the malice of Akiyama Cho[u]zaémon, from whom that day he had heard
it.

He turned to greet Iémon, who emerged ready for the street. At the
entrance they halted. Said Iémon--"It will be a long drawn-out affair.
Deign to retire, and not await the return." Replied O'Iwa--"A small
matter. The sound of the Danna's footstep will arouse Iwa to receive
him." Iémon laughed. "How so? How distinguish my steps from those of
Akiyama San or other constant callers?" Said O'Iwa gravely--"When the
wife can no longer distinguish the husband's footstep, then affection
has departed. O'Iwa will be ready to receive Iémon, no matter what the
hour."--"And, indeed, a late one," put in Kondo[u]. "The party consists
mainly of young men. After it they will adjourn to Nakacho[u]. Is it
allowed to Iémon Dono to accompany them?" O'Iwa winced a little. "The
Master is always master, within and without the house. He will do as he
pleases."--"Gently said; like a true wife. Truly such a married pair are
rarely to be encountered. They are the mandarin duck and drake of
Morokoshi transplanted to Yotsuya. Rokuro[u]bei feels proud of his
guardianship." As he and Iémon took their way along the Teramachi, he
said--"Iémon is indeed a wonderful man. He is handsome and pursued by
the women. O'Iwa undeniably is ugly; yet never is there failure to show
her respect and consideration, in private as well as public. One's life
here in Yotsuya is open to all the neighbours, and these speak well of
Iémon." Said the younger man, in matter of fact tone--"Who could fail
toward Iwa? She is amiability itself. Plain, perhaps, but gentleness is
the compensating quality, a truer source of household wealth than
beauty."--"Well spoken! Deign to keep it in heart, for the neighbours'
tongues wag as to Iémon and O'Hana. Malice can cause as much unhappiness
as downright wickedness. Besides, Kwaiba is no man to trifle with."
Iémon was a little put out and alarmed at the directness of Kondo[u]'s
reference. "Be sure there is nothing in such talk. A slight service,
rendered in earlier days, makes O'Hana San more cordial to one otherwise
a stranger. The excess shown is perhaps to be discouraged. But Ito[u]
Dono is good company and has good wine; and besides really is a good
_go_ player. It would be loss to shun his house."

Kondo[u] noted a first symptom on their arrival. He spoke sharply to
the maid--"Middle age in company with youth plainly finds a poor
reception. Is that the master's order? The clogs of Tamiya are not the
only ones. Is Rokuro[u]bei to shift for himself?" The girl, all
confusion, made profuse apology as she hastened to repair the neglect.
Kondo[u] was easily mollified. "Bah! No wonder. Bring Tamiya near a
woman, and all is confusion.... But Ito[u] Dono?"--"This way, honoured
Sirs: the Danna awaits the guests." They entered the sitting room, to
find Kwaiba in a high state of anger and sulks. For some reason, error
in transmission or date or other ambiguity, not a man of the guests had
appeared. "The supper prepared is next to useless. We four can do but
little in its dispatch. Not so with the wine; let every man do double
duty here." He hustled around and gave his orders with some excitement;
more than cordial with the guests who had not failed him. There was
present one Kibei. Iémon had noted with curiosity his first appearance
on this ground. What effect was this factor going to have on O'Hana's
position in the household. He had been reassured on the physical point.
Kibei was exceedingly ugly, a regular mask, and O'Hana was a woman to
make much of physical beauty, as well as strength and ruggedness. He was
a younger son of Inagaki Sho[u]gen, a _hatamoto_ with a _yashiki_ in
Honjo[u] and an income of three thousand _koku_.[22] It was almost
certain that Kwaiba would adopt Kibei. The negotiations had been long
continued, and there was some hitch in the matter that Iémon could not
make out. What he did realize was Kibei's hostility to himself. A noted
fencer, making some sort of a living as teacher of the art, he was the
last man with whom Iémon had any desire for a quarrel. Iémon was a
coward, and the cold eye of Kibei sent a chill down his spine. Himself,
he was always excessively polite in their intercourse.

Limited as to number the party tried to make up for the missing guests
by liveliness. There was a dance by Kibei, drinking as substitutes of
the absent, and competition in _uta_ (poetry). Handing in his own
effort--no mean one--Iémon left the room for a moment. As he came out on
the corridor, and was about to return to the guest room, he found the
maid O'Moto awaiting him with water and towel. A slight puckering frown
came over Iémon's face at this imprudence. Said the girl
pleadingly--"Danna Sama, deign to exercise patience. That of the
mistress is sorely tried. The absence of the other guests, the pursuit
of Kibei Dono, who only seeks to compromise her and secure her expulsion
from the house, or even death at the hand of Kwaiba Dono, has driven her
well nigh mad. A moment--in this room." Iémon drew back.--"A room
apart, and in darkness! The age of seven years once passed, and boy and
girl are never to be allowed alone together." He would have refused, but
a sudden push and he was within. The _sho[u]ji_ closed at once.

Kwaiba's voice called loudly--"Hana! Hana! What has become of the
girl? There is no one to serve the wine. If the ugliness of Kibei drives
her to cover, Tamiya's beauty should lure her out. Hana! Hana!" O'Hana
slipped hastily from the arms of Iémon. Passing through the garden she
entered the kitchen and snatched up a _saké_ bottle from the stove. She
did not notice that the fire had gone entirely out. She and Iémon
entered the sitting room together, from different sides. Rokuro[u]bei
looked sharply at Iémon. Kibei was engaged in hot talk with Kwaiba. Said
Kondo[u]--"Where have you been? Pressed by necessity? For such a lapse
of time! nonsense! Is rice powder found in such a place? 'Plaster'? It
does not leave the mark of a cheek on the sleeve." He laid a warning
hand on Iémon, skilfully removing the telltale mark in so doing. "What
has happened is clear enough. Fortunately Kwaiba and Kibei have got into
a dispute over the merits of Heinai and Sho[u]setsu as fencing masters;
both of them dead as the long ago quarrels of the Toyotomi and Tokugawa
Houses. Heinai was loyal, and Sho[u]setsu a traitor; but Kibei tries the
old man and officer by supporting the prowess of the latter. Besides the
_saké_ is cold and Kwaiba at start was in a very bad temper. He has
thought for naught but his drink and disappointment. Cajole him by
agreeing with him, but don't get into a quarrel with Kibei. He is expert
with the sword, has a temper as ugly as his face, and would willingly
engage in one. He don't like you...." He stopped. Kwaiba was speaking
sharply. He had just taken the fresh bottle. "Cold as a stone! How
careless you are."--"Not so," said O'Hana in some surprise. "It has just
come off the stove." Kwaiba put the bottle in her hand, to her
confusion. "O'Hana must have been asleep; or much engaged, not to note
the difference." For the first time he looked sharply at her, then at
Iémon. O'Hana often executed great freedom with him--"Asleep! Just so;
and no wonder. Without guests the evening has been stupid enough. If
Tamiya Sama had brought his wife with him it would have been complete."
Kwaiba, Kibei, Kondo[u] smiled at the sally. Iémon took the cue, and
chose to resent the words. He said coldly--"O'Iwa certainly brings spice
into everything she engages in. Her intelligence is unusual." O'Hana
looked at him; then smiled a little, reassured. Passing behind him she
stumbled. "Forgotten"--Iémon felt a letter thrust into his hand, which
he passed quickly to his sleeve. Then he and Kondo[u] rose to take their
leave. The usual salutations followed. As if to compensate for the
failure of the entertainment all joined in seeing them depart. Kwaiba
was still grumbling and half quarrelling with O'Hana. O'Moto was engaged
with Kondo[u] Rokuro[u]bei. Kibei insisted on aiding Iémon; and Iémon
did not dare to refuse his services in donning the _haori_. As he
adjusted the awkward efforts of Kibei on one side, this amateur valet
made a mess of it on the other. Besides, neither of them was any too
steady on his feet. Then Kondo[u] and Iémon set out in the rain.
"_Sayonara! Sayonara!_"




CHAPTER X

THE PLOT AGAINST O'IWA


The following morning Iémon sat brooding, mind and tongue clouded by
the drinking bout of the previous night. O'Iwa silently busied herself
with his renovation. Rokuro[u]bei had delivered him over to her,
decidedly the worse for wine and wear. He was somewhat astonished at the
young man's easy discomfiture. Middle age with the Nipponese usually
means the seasoned and steady toper. Regarding the matter as partly due
to her own fault, and reassured by Kondo[u] as to the events of the
evening, O'Iwa heated the _saké_ with all the greater care, serving it
herself, chatting on the indifferent gossip of the neighbourhood. She
spoke of the talk current as to Ito[u] Kwaiba's adoption of an heir.
"This man Kibei, his disposition appears to be as ugly as his face."
With a little smile she added, "for the latter compensation is to be
found in the first-named quality; a truth which he seems to disregard.
What will become of O'Hana San?" For the first time since the night
before the thought of the letter flashed into Iémon's mind. He put down
the renovating morning draft, and on some excuse arose. His _kimono_ lay
neatly folded in the _hirabuta_ (flat tray). Hastily he searched the
sleeves. There was not a sign of the missive. With clouded brow he
returned to the sitting room. A glance at O'Iwa made him feel ashamed.
It had never come into her hands. He knew her well enough to be assured
that he would have found it, scrupulously laid together with the tobacco
pouch, nose wipe (_hanagami_), and divers other minor articles of daily
use carried on the person. The whole affair perhaps was a dream. The
more he considered, the more he became so convinced. His transports with
O'Hana, their surprise, Kondo[u]'s rebuke--so far the evening was
tolerably clear. It was only as to the final cups, the rising to depart,
the standing in the cold night air, that the exact course of events
became clouded. "Ah! It was all a vision. O'Hana never would have been
so imprudent." There was a trace of doubt in his mind. He would clear it
up at the fountain source--at Kwaiba's house and by the lips of O'Hana.

Kwaiba greeted him with almost boisterous cheerfulness. "Ah! Tamiya
comes early; a flattering acknowledgment of last night's reception." To
Iémon's deprecatory speech and apology--"Don't talk folly, after the
manner of a country boor. Iémon San is a man of the world; and will give
this Kwaiba credit for being the same. What does it amount to? A matter
of a little too much wine.... Hana! Hana! The Master of Tamiya is
present. Cut some bean paste, and bring tea. Heat the wine. Matazaémon
was so sober an old dog that it is doubtful whether O'Iwa knows aught
about the best remedy for past drinking." As Kibei entered--"There is
the inventory of the Shimosa farms. Condescend to take a glance at the
report of the _nanushi_ (bailiff). Hana will aid." Thus dismissed, the
two left the room. Kwaiba turned to Iémon--"A draught: no? Then Kwaiba
will drink for both. For him it is a day of rejoicing. The coming of
Tamiya is opportune. It was intended to send for him. Deign to aid this
Kwaiba with counsel. The adoption of Kibei has finally been settled."
The old man's exultation influenced even the indifference of Iémon's
aching head. With well-simulated interest he said--"Naruhodo! Kibei Dono
is indeed to be congratulated. As to our chief, since everything is to
his satisfaction, Iémon is but too glad to speak his pleasure, to offer
his congratulations."--"Nay! A little more than that, Iémon Uji. This
Kwaiba would seek his aid in another matter of importance. Kwaiba is
old. A woman no longer is an object to him. He cannot make a child. If
O'Hana should give birth to a child great would be the discomfiture,
knowing the truth. What is to be done in such a case?" He now was
looking with direct inquiry into the face of Iémon. The latter was much
confused. He stammered--"Just so: so indeed. O'Hana San is truly an
embarrassment. Doubtless she is also an obstacle to Kibei Dono. She...."
Sneered Kwaiba--"Tamiya, though young, is wise. He grasps the situation
at once. Deign, Iémon San, to take O'Hana yourself." Kwaiba raised his
voice a little. Kibei brought O'Hana with him from the next room. She
seemed alarmed and embarrassed. Said Kwaiba--"What have you there; the
inventory? Ah! A letter: and there is no one to read a letter like Iémon
San. Deign, Sir, to favour us. Iémon San alone can give the contents the
proper inflection." He handed it to Iémon. A glance showed the latter
that it was a letter from O'Hana, probably that of the previous night.
His pocket had been neatly picked by Kibei. It was plain. He had been
trapped. The pretended entertainment had been a plot in which the
passion of O'Hana had been given full chance to range. Even the
disinterested witness, the old fool Kondo[u], had been provided. He
caught a curious, mocking smile on the face of the girl O'Moto, just
then passing along the _ro[u]ka_.

Kwaiba allowed the silence to become oppressive. He seemed to await an
incriminating outburst on the part of O'Hana, plainly on the verge of
tears. However, the girl caught herself up. Instead she turned a calm,
inquiring look toward the three men. Iémon alone looked down, his gaze
on the letter the characters of which danced and waved before his eyes.
Sharp as he ordinarily was, before this vigorous and astute old man,
backed by the ruffianly prospective son with impertinent smile, the
cowardice of Iémon deprived him of all spirit. His faculties were
numbed. Kwaiba leaned over and removed the letter from his hands. "Since
Iémon San will not read the letter, Kwaiba will try to do so; a poor
substitute for the accomplished cleric." The old fellow seemed to know
everything, as the tone of contempt indicated. He ran the scroll out in
his hands--"Naruhodo! Ma! Ma! What's this? From some woman: a lascivious
jade indeed!... Eh! Kibei Dono, apology is due your ears. This Kwaiba
laughed at your suspicions." He threw down the scroll, as in a fury.
Kibei picked it up. He began to read:

     "Night is the source of pleasure, but greater that pleasure
     at sight of Iémon. The day comes when Iémon and Hana will be
     husband and wife, in fact if not in form. 'Ah! Day and night
     to be at the service of Iémon.' Thus does Hana pray gods and
     Buddhas. When distant from his side, even though the time be
     short, painful is its passage. Place this letter next to
     your very person. May that night come quickly, when the
     coming of Iémon is awaited. The connection with O'Iwa San is
     the punishment for sin committed in a previous existence.
     Condescend to dismiss her from your mind. View the matter
     wholly in this light. The spiteful brush (pen) refuses
     further service. Hard, hard, is the lot of this Hana. The
     honoured Master comes; the heartfelt wish is accomplished.

     With compliments,

     To Iémon Sama." HANA.

Kwaiba's rage grew and grew with the reading. At Iémon's name he sprang
up and made a movement toward the stand on which reposed his swords.
Laying a hand on the larger weapon he turned with a scowl--"Ah! This
Kwaiba is old, but in vigour he is young. It is for Kwaiba to sport with
the women. They are not to make a fool of him." Kibei sharply
interposed. "Does Kwaiba Dono gain satisfaction by such a vengeance? To
Kibei it seems a poor one. A matter so easily to be settled is not to be
made a scandal in the ward. Deign, honoured Sir, so to regard it. To
punish both at once with death is proper. But is it expedient?
Condescend to hear the words of Kibei."

Kwaiba pulled himself up. It was as if some one had dragged him back.
His rage departed. A cold malice took its place. He smiled blandly--"One
does not quarrel over a harlot. Kwaiba spares their lives. Iémon shall
take Hana home--as wife."--"As wife!" Iémon broke through his fear.
"Surely the honoured _Kashira_ is unreasonable. This Iémon is but the
_muko_ of Tamiya. To demand that O'Iwa San be discarded is going too
far. Positively in this matter, though there have been love passages,
the most intimate relation has never followed--now or in previous
relations."--"You lie!" said Kwaiba coldly. "Furthermore 'tis a matter
not passing the period of last night. But that is not to the point.
Against Matazaémon this Kwaiba has a grudge--as yet unsatisfied. Through
O'Iwa San this shall be paid. With Iémon no harsh measures are adopted.
Nay; Kwaiba comes to his aid. You, too, Kibei, shall assist.... Ah! For
the ready consent, thanks. Ma! A delicious revenge is that gathered by
Kwaiba. O'Hana the harlot takes the place of the Ojo[u]san. And she
loves Iémon! In our feasts Natsumé and Imaizumi get the skin of the
omelet; Iémon the centre. Then O'Iwa is to be driven out. To that Tamiya
cannot object. He substitutes honey for garlic;[23] O'Hana the flower
for the ugly toad O'Iwa. Splendid! Splendid! But how? Ah! Here's
Kondo[u], just in the nick of time. Rokuro[u]bei, aid us with your
experience and influence. Aid us with Iémon, who would cleave to the
O'Baké."

Put in possession of the facts Kondo[u] was aghast. He had come to the
parting of the ways; and under conditions which assured his
participation in the plot. At first he turned on Iémon with bitter
recrimination. "Oh! A virtuous fellow, who would drink a man's wine, lie
with his woman, and then preach morality to a household! But the
mischief is done. If not the paramour of O'Hana San, everybody believes
it to be so...." Kwaiba held up his hands in well-simulated anger. Kibei
and Rokuro[u]bei interfered. Iémon's last resistance was broken down. To
talk? That is the business of a priest. Soon he was as eagerly engaged
in the plot as if he had left the house in Samoncho[u] for that purpose.
Said Rokuro[u]bei--"What difficulty does the matter present? Set on
Watanabé Goro[u] to tempt and make love to O'Iwa. He is badly in debt.
The handsome man of the ward everyone would suspect her fall. Surprised
by Iémon, O'Iwa is driven out as unchaste. This Kondo[u] stipulates that
matters go no further. After all O'Iwa is innocent of offence. The
husband's full rights are not to be excused. Neither she, nor Watanabé
is to suffer injury."

Kibei laughed outright at the idea of a drawn sword in Iémon's hand.
Iémon turned the contempt on to Kondo[u]. Sneering, he replied--"The
plan is worthless. O'Iwa is chastity itself. In the absence of this
Iémon no man is allowed entrance to the house." Kwaiba knitted his
brows--"Kakusuké! Kakusuké!" As the _chu[u]gen_ appeared--"Go yonder to
the house of Akiyama Cho[u]zaémon San. Say that the Kumi-gashira would
speak with Akiyama San." As the man departed--"Cho[u]zaémon is the man.
For gossip and malice he is a very woman. Rejoice and he weeps; weep and
he rejoices. If Akiyama cannot concoct some plan to get rid of O'Iwa,
then no one can.... Alas! O'Hana and Iémon must die by the hand of this
Kwaiba. Kibei will give his aid." The old man and Kibei got much
enjoyment out of the cowardice of Iémon and the fright of O'Hana. But
not for long. Akiyama Cho[u]zaémon, the one-time boy lover of O'Iwa; a
long, lean, hungry-looking man, with long, cadaverous face and a
decidedly bad eye, appeared with the _chu[u]gen_ Kakusuké close behind.
The latter seemed a sort of policeman attending the none-too-willing
Cho[u]zaémon. The latter's brow lightened at sight of the company. He
owed Kwaiba money. Sending away the servant, Kwaiba unfolded the
situation. Said Cho[u]zaémon--"Heigh! Tamiya takes the cast off leman of
Ito[u] Dono. Fair exchange is no robbery; Kibei Uji against O'Hana San.
Iémon San goes into the matter with eyes wide open. The lady is an old
intimate, it is said." This manner of approaching the subject was
Cho[u]zaémon's way. He cared nothing for the scowls of Kibei nor the
wrath of Kwaiba. He was needed, or they would not have called him to
counsel. As for Iémon, he was grateful to Cho[u]zaémon; as neighbour,
and for the insult to Kibei and Kwaiba.

Continued the mediator--"The obstacle of course is the O'Baké. O'Iwa
is to be driven out. And Watanabé won't answer? Maa! Chastity in an
O'Baké! It is a thing unheard of. 'Tis such, once of womankind, who
seduce living men. Tamiya is now head of the House. O'Iwa once driven
out, the property remains in his hands as its representative. She must
be forced to leave of her own will. Good; very good. What is it worth to
Kwaiba Dono?"--"Look to Iémon for commission," said Kwaiba roughly.
"Nay! Nay!" mouthed Cho[u]zaémon. "Kwaiba is Kwaiba; Iémon is Iémon. The
two are to be settled with separately. If Kwaiba Dono had gone to
extremes at the start no question would have been raised. To do so now,
with all present and after discussion, is out of the question. Kwaiba
Dono wishes to adopt Kibei Uji; to get rid of O'Hana San. Iémon San has
been neatly trapped. He must consent. O'Hana is a woman. She has no
voice in the matter. All this is clear. But as to Cho[u]zaémon's labour
in the affair; that it is which interests this Akiyama." He gave a sour
reprimanding look at Kibei. Then he looked impertinently from Kwaiba to
Iémon, and from Iémon to Kwaiba. Iémon in delight nodded assent.
Cho[u]zaémon promptly turned his back on him and faced Kwaiba. At first
the old man was very angry at the acuteness of Cho[u]zaémon. The sharp,
free exposure did not please him. Then the idea of countering on this
acuteness made him good tempered. He grumbled--"The ten _ryo[u]_ owing
to Kwaiba at the New Year--principal and interest; such is the fee for a
successful issue." Cho[u]zaémon held up his hands in pretended
horror--"Pay back borrowed money! Is that expected by the
Kumi-gashira?"--"Not 'expected,'" put in Kwaiba promptly. "With the seal
of Akiyama San the return is assured." Cho[u]zaémon became
thoughtful--"It is true. The last loan was under seal.... Too bad....
Well! Well! The conditions are hard. Submission is necessary. The debt
will be forgiven?"--"Kibei and Iémon stand as witnesses," replied
Kwaiba--"Then how is this?" said Cho[u]zaémon. All put their heads
together. Akiyama Cho[u]zaémon went into details. Kwaiba pushed back his
cushion; slapped his thighs. "Cho[u]zaémon, you are cheap at double the
money. Just the thing! Eh, Iémon, Uji? Eh, Muko San?" All grinned a
raptured assent.




CHAPTER XI

THE PLOT DEVELOPS


For two days Iémon was maturing the preliminaries. He seemed unwell and
out of sorts. The third day he did not get up at all. O'Iwa was properly
anxious. Said she--"The change in the year is a sickly season.
Condescend to take some drug. Allow Suian Sensei to be summoned." Iémon
grumbled a dissent. She went on in her enthusiasm--"He is the very
prince of doctors. See: here is a salve he recommends; for skin and
nerves. O'Hana San, the beautiful concubine of Ito[u] Sama, uses nothing
else. He guarantees it on her praise, as means to remove blemishes of
any kind or source." Iémon looked up quickly. The connection puzzled and
did not please him. Perhaps he noted a puffiness about O'Iwa's face,
remembered a repulsion toward marital usages. The women should leave the
men to play their own game. He said gruffly--"Suian! A dealer in
cosmetics and charms. Have naught to do with his plasters and potions;
as cheats or something worse. As for O'Iwa, she is black as a farm hand
from Ryu[u]kyu[u] (Loo-choo). O'Hana is fair as the white _kiku_. Can
the pastes of Suian Sensei change black to white?" Startled, O'Iwa
looked round from the glass into which she was peering. She was taken by
surprise. In their personal relations Iémon had always been more than
considerate. For some weeks in secret she had been using this drug of
Suian Sensei. In childhood O'Iwa had shown something of an epileptic
tendency. This had worn off with time. Of late the recurrence had
alarmed her. The drug of Suian, at the time anyhow, made her less
conscious of the alarmed critical feeling which heralded the inception
of the attacks.

Iémon gave her but time to catch the meaning of his insult. He went
on--"Probably it is but a cold. Some eggs, with plenty of hot wine, will
obviate ill effects. Deign to see that they are prepared." The channel
of O'Iwa's thoughts changed. At once she was the housekeeper and nurse,
and all solicitude to make him at ease. In the course of the meal of
eggs with _saké_ in came Natsumé Kyuzo[u] and Imaizumi Jinzaémon. "Ah!
Iémon, pardon the intrusion. Probably the engagement of yesterday with
Kwaiba Sama was forgotten.... In bed! A cold? But such is no treatment
for the complaint. There should be a cheerful, lively atmosphere.... Ah!
Here is the dice box. One can shake dice as well lying down as sitting.
Deign to refresh the spirits with play as well as wine." Iémon saw to it
that both were available. With surprise at first, misgiving afterwards,
O'Iwa heated bottle after bottle of _saké_. The men did not pay the
slightest attention to her presence. Absorbed in their game, there was
but a rough call from time to time for wine, addressed to the air, a
servant, anybody. At the end of the play Natsumé rose to leave in high
spirits. Imaizumi and Tamiya were correspondingly depressed. This was
but a first day's procedure. Day after day, for the space of half the
month, the play was repeated. Iémon had long since recovered. One day he
stood with his hands shoved into the folds of his sash. He was very
sober and sour. "Iwa, is there money in the house?" She looked at him in
surprise. "Matters have not turned out at all well with Kyuzo[u] and
Jinzaémon. This Iémon is a hundred _ryo[u]_ to the bad. With spare cash
at hand an attempt can be made to repair the loss."

O'Iwa prostrated herself before him. "May the Danna deign to consider.
To Iwa this pastime of gambling seems a very ill one, particularly in a
man of official rank. It is fraught with peril; and the offence once
known rarely is pardoned. Condescend to hear and forgive the warning of
this Iwa." She stopped a little frightened. Iémon was looking at her in
greatest wrath and astonishment. "What! Is there argument from wife to
husband? This insolence of behaviour crowns the insult of refusal. The
very sight of your face is enough to make one sick at the stomach. Boors
and _bakémono_ are shut out at the Hakoné barrier. But you--the guards
have been put to sleep, and you have slipped through. Shut up! Get the
money, or...." O'Iwa crouched at the _sho[u]ji_, in terror and surprise.
The insulting words heaped on her pained and tortured. Now she felt the
sharp sting of a hand forcibly applied to her cheek. Without a word she
left the room. Returning she brought thirty _ryo[u]_ in gold on a
salver. Timidly prostrate she presented it to Iémon. "Condescend to
pardon Iwa. That she is ugly and incompetent she knows. Did not Iémon
accept her?" The man stuffed the gold in his girdle. In reply--"No:
Iémon was cheated by Kondo[u] and Cho[u]bei. A plain woman--perhaps; but
a monster, a worse than _rokurokubi_, was never thought of even in a
dream. Compensation is to be found. Iémon likes gambling. He will
gamble. Have a care to supply the needed funds; and don't interfere."
Roughly he shoved her out of the way, and left the house.

For long O'Iwa saw nothing of Iémon; but she heard from him. In fact he
was living in semi-secrecy at the house of Rokuro[u]bei. Now this
messenger, then that, would come to O'Iwa. "If there is no money--sell
something. The bearer will indicate. A supply must be found." Thus one
thing after another left the house--to be stored in the godown of
Kondo[u] Rokuro[u]bei, to whose clever suggestion was due this way of
stripping O'Iwa of all she possessed. With goods and clothes went the
servants. In the course of a few weeks O'Iwa was living in one room,
furnished with three _tatami_ in lieu of the usual twelve in number.
Hibachi, _andon_ (night lamp), the single garment she wore, this was all
she possessed in the house. Then at last she saw him. The light dawned
on a cold snowy morning of early March. O'Iwa rose, opened the _amado_,
and started her day. About the fourth hour (9 A.M.) the _sho[u]ji_ were
pushed aside and Iémon entered. He looked as if fresh from a night's
debauch. His garments were dirty and disordered. His face was sallow,
the eyes deep set and weary, his manner listless. O'Iwa gave him the
only cushion in the room. Seated before the _hibachi_ (brazier) after
some time he said--"A million pardons: the luck has been very bad....
Ah! The place here seems in disorder. It is not fit for a man to live
in." He looked around as one waking from a dream. "No wonder: yet all
can be restored. Iémon has surprised you?" Said O'Iwa timidly--"Matters
are a little at odds and ends. O'Iwa needs but little; a stalk of
_daikon_ (radish) and a handful of wheat (_mugi_). Does the Danna remain
here? If so...." There was a painful hitch in her voice, a puzzled look
on her face. She had one _bu_ in cash. In fact she was hoping for the
monthly visit of Yosuké the farmer; if there was a farm any longer. She
did not know.

"For the night," replied Iémon. "Sleep and food are the essentials of
good play. All has been lost in the gambling houses of Shinjuku and
Shinagawa, at the Nakanocho[u]. Is there no money in the house?...
Evidently not. Deign to secure some, no matter how." He took the silver
_bu_ she presented to him. "At least a bath and tobacco can be had. See
to it that a meal is ready at even; not much, _sashimi_ (sliced raw
fish) and wine. Iémon would play, not eat." With this he rose. O'Iwa
heard the sound of the closing gate. Long she remained, her face buried
in her knees. In this gloomy situation what was she to do? She looked
around. There was not a thing to sell; not even herself. Who would buy
the ugly O'Iwa? An idea came into her head. In a moment she was in the
street. Soon she stood at the door of her uncle, Yoémon. With this uncle
and aunt she had but little to do. Matazaémon had been at daggers drawn
with his brother, whom he accused of being a wretched miser, one
acquiring wealth by very questionable means for a _samurai_. In old days
Cho[u]bei had been a hired agent of Yoémon. The principal had escaped;
the second had to leave Yotsuya and its neighbourhood. The Obasan (aunt)
came out at O'Iwa's call. She greeted her niece with surprise. "Oya!
Oya! Iwa is a stranger to this house. It has been heard that a splendid
_muko_ was received at Tamiya." The old woman looked at O'Iwa shrewdly,
and not without kindness. O'Iwa took heart. She made answer--"It is
true; of late matters have not gone well. Just now Iwa would ask the
loan of a _sho[u]_ (1/5 peck) of rice, together with a _bu_ to buy eels
or _sashimi_.[24] It is very rude indeed...."--"Very rude indeed!" said
a harsh voice close by. O'Iwa shrank to the outer part of the doorway.
The aunt fled to the inner part of the house. Continued Yoémon--"And
what is Iwa doing at the house of Yoémon? That there is relationship
between them this Yoémon does not recognize. Yoémon never exchanged look
or word with his brother Matazaémon, nor does he desire to do so with
the issue. Let the Tamiya of Samoncho[u] look out for itself. A _muko_
was taken without aid or advice of Yoémon. A stranger, one practising
wayside divination, this fine fellow turns out a gambler and a debauched
man, to the ruin of the House. Iwa can look to him; ignorant and foolish
woman that she is. This Yoémon would contribute to the needs of a beggar
before granting even a single _mon_ to Iwa."

The grating rattled sharply as the angry old man pushed it to and let
fall the bar. O'Iwa looked into the dark recess with pained and startled
eyes. So much of a recluse she was learning that Iémon had long been the
talk of the ward. She turned, and slowly took her way back to
Samoncho[u]. Here the reaction came. Strong was the inclination to laugh
and weep; too strong for self-control. In alarm she ran to take from the
closet the potion of Suian. Its effect was the opposite of what she
expected--or perhaps it was taken too late. For an hour O'Iwa writhed,
screamed, laughed in her agony. Then she sank into slumber. On awakening
the sun was already well past the zenith. She sprang up in alarm. This
meal to prepare--the duty of the wife--and not a step taken. It could
not be helped. Just as she was, twisting a towel around her disordered
hair, she started out to the place of one Kuraya Jibei of the Asakusa
Kuramaé no Saka. This man was a lender on the notes from the rice
pensions of the _samurai_--a _fudasashi_ dealer, as these men were
called.

The distance was great. O'Iwa was tired out on her arrival. At the
entrance the _kozo[u]_ or "boy" hailed her sharply. He waved her off.
"No! No! Old girl, it won't do. Nothing is to be had here. Please come
back the day before yesterday." He barred the way. Said O'Iwa, shrinking
back--"Nothing is wanted of the honoured house. An interview with Jibei
San, an inquiry to make. Such the request." Something about tone or
manner, certainly not pity, made the fellow hesitate--"Jibei San! A
beggar woman wants an interview with Jibei San! How about it?"--"Nothing
to be had," answered the _banto[u]'s_ voice. "Tell her to read the white
tablet hung before the entrance. It is all the house has to give." In
speaking he edged around a little. O'Iwa raised the towel from her face.
At once he was on his feet. "Ah! For long the honoured lady of Tamiya
has not been seen. Many and profitable the dealings with Matazaémon
Dono. Condescend to pardon this senseless fellow. He outrivals his
companions in lack of brains. Deign to enter." The _kozo[u]_ was all
apology--"Condescend wholly to pardon. Deign to have pity on the
ignorance shown. With fear and respect...." Looking into O'Iwa's face he
was overcome by his feelings. Bursting with laughter he fled to the
front of the shop to stuff the dust rag into his mouth in mistake for a
towel. This slight error restored his equanimity. The _banto[u]_ looked
after him with some fellow feeling and much anger. "He is half idiot.
Condescend to disregard his rude speech and manner. After all he is but
a _kozo[u]_.... What can this Jibei do for the lady of Tamiya?"

"Knowing that the House has dealings with Jibei San, and there being
necessity for three _sho[u]_ of rice, it is ventured to ask the loan."
Thus spoke O'Iwa. Money, actual coin, was on the end of her tongue, but
somehow she could not get the words out. Jibei was not particularly
astonished. Since Iémon had taken charge of the affairs of Tamiya, its
income was usually discounted well beforehand. Moreover, the rumour of
Iémon's gambling was spreading among his connections. Neither Kwaiba nor
Akiyama, nor the others engaged, were men to lose sight of the
likelihood of fine pickings from the Tamiya. Jibei made prompt answer.
"Respectfully heard and understood. It shall be sent.... Ah! It is
required now? Matsu! Matsu! Put up three _sho[u]_ of rice for the lady
of Tamiya. Its conveyance is to be provided. Place a _bu_ in the parcel.
The distance to Yotsuya is great. The _kago_ (litter) men are exacting."
O'Iwa's heart leaped with gratitude at the perspicacity of Jibei. He
watched her departing figure as far as he could see it. Then he took out
a ledger; and against the name of Tamiya he placed a question mark.

It was dusk when O'Iwa entered the house at Samoncho[u]. She gave a
start on finding Iémon glumly seated before the fireless brazier. "A
fine hour for a woman to be gadding the street. And the meal!
Unprepared: excellent habits in a wife!----" "To the Danna apology is
due. This Iwa is much in the wrong. But for the meal money had first to
be secured...."--"Then there is money, or means to procure it? Where is
it? How much?"--"Nay, the rice is here. This _bu_ is enough to secure
eels, _sashimi_, some delicacy...." She hesitated before Iémon's
doubting glare. He was eyeing rice and money. The mark on the bag caught
his eye. "Whence was this rice had? And this money? From Jibei, the
_fudasashi_ dealer? A visit paid in such garb? Truly the House is
disgraced, not only by your ugliness, but by ill conduct. Who could
remain in such a den?" O'Iwa threw herself in his way as he rose to
leave the room. Clinging to his sleeve she pleaded for pardon, as only a
woman can do who has done no wrong. There was an ugly look on Iémon's
face as he turned on her. Frightened, she would have fled. Instead she
could only crouch like a dog under the blows he showered on her. Then
with a violent kick in the groin he rolled her over, and departed.

O'Iwa heard footsteps. Had Iémon returned? Despite the pain, she half
sat up in her dread. Kondo[u] Rokuro[u]bei appeared. The portly man held
up his hands in horror and benevolence at what he saw. "But O'Iwa--what
has occurred? Ah! Kondo[u] has heard rumours of what is going on. The
_tatami_ (mats), screens, drawers (_tansu_), clothes-baskets--the house
is completely stripped to satisfy the thirst for the money of others.
Now he has descended to blows! Truly he is a miserable fellow."
Kondo[u]'s voice grew loud in his wrath. "This must not go on.
Rokuro[u]bei is responsible to Tamiya, to the ancestors. To be subject
to a fellow like this will never do. A divorce is to be secured. Let him
depart with his plunder. Let him have everything; only to get rid of
him. He is husband, and head of Tamiya. But Kondo[u] will be too much
for him. A divorce shall be secured. Ito[u] Dono, the ward chief, is to
be interested in the affair. Pressure shall be put on Iémon to grant the
letter of divorce." Indignation choked the worthy man. O'Iwa spoke
slowly, with pain and effort. "Be in no such haste, Kondo[u] Sama. Iémon
has not been a good man. Much is known to this Iwa. He buys women at
Nakacho[u]. He buys _geisha_. He gambles. These are a man's vices. As to
these Iwa has nothing to say. She is the wife, for two lives to maintain
the house in good and ill fortune. A good wife does not look to divorce
to rectify mistakes. With such remedy Iwa has nothing to do. But is not
Kondo[u] Sama the _nako[u]do_? Was he not the mediator in the marriage
between Iémon and Iwa? Deign to speak as _nako[u]do_. Rebuke Iémon.
Cause this gambling to be brought to an end." Rokuro[u]bei could hardly
hear her to the end. His testy impatience was in evidence. He broke into
protest--"This is complete madness; utter folly. You allow this fellow
to ruin the House. He will dispose of the pension."--"The goods, the
House, Iwa, all belong to Iémon; to do with as he pleases. Iwa is the
wife. She must submit.... Ah! You refuse. Kondo[u] Sama is no longer the
friend of Iwa, to act as _nako[u]do_." What had come into the soul of
this gentle woman? Kondo[u] in fright shrank back from the look she gave
him--"A very demon! The mother, O'Mino, has returned to life. Oni! Oni!
You are not human. Kondo[u] assuredly will have nothing to do with
O'Iwa, or O'Iwa's affairs." He left her helpless in the middle of her
fit. Forgetting in his fright even his clogs, barefooted, he fled from
the house in Samoncho[u].




CHAPTER XII

KWAIBA'S REVENGE


Kondo[u] Rokuro[u]bei went direct to the council of the conspirators. He
found them assembled in the house of Ito[u]. Kwaiba, Iémon, O'Hana,
Cho[u]zaémon, Kibei, were drinking _saké_. Kwaiba as usual was bragging
over his prowess in youth extended into age. O'Hana was laughing at him
behind his back. Kibei was surly; yet his share of income was assured.
Kwaiba roundly berated Iémon for lack of energy. "O'Iwa has been allowed
to get the upper hand. Iémon is far too soft to deal with a woman who
has been spoiled all her life." Iémon listened in silence, with a rather
doubtful smile of acquiescence or contempt. In fact, knowing O'Iwa as he
did, he had little confidence in Kwaiba or Cho[u]zaémon, or the methods
they proposed. His own plan was maturing. Meanwhile in part it ran
parallel. On this assembly burst the discomfited Rokuro[u]bei--"Ah! What
an experience! The woman is a very fiend. A new pair of _geta_, bought
but yesterday, and left at your house, Iémon Uji." Iémon looked at
Kondo[u]'s frightened face and bare feet. Then he burst into a roar of
laughter. Kwaiba was indignant. "Is the fright of Kondo[u] San any
license to bring his dirty feet on the _tatami_. Deign, good sir, to
accept water for the cleansing. O'Hana San now is inmate of the house of
Kondo[u]; yet condescend for the moment to act the mistress here." This
was part of the arrangement. With the goods of O'Iwa the person of
O'Hana had been transferred to the charge of the honest Rokuro[u]bei.
There Iémon had easy and decent access to the use of both.

Said Iémon--"What happened after this Iémon left Samoncho[u]? Kondo[u]
Dono has been frightened." Kondo[u] puffed and fumed as he cleansed his
feet at the mounting step. He groaned--"Iémon Dono, you are certainly
done for. Was it 'three years,' she said? Her face was frightful. This
Rokuro[u]bei has no more to do with the affair. He goes no more to
Samoncho[u]. Alas! He will never sleep again. Oh! Oh! To be haunted in
the next existence by such a rotten O'Baké." Said Kwaiba--"Did Iémon
really beat her? He says he did." Answered Kondo[u]--"She could barely
move a limb. Of love for Iémon not a spark is left; but she clings to
the honour of Tamiya, to the wife's duty to the House. There is no
moving her. Rokuro[u]bei is suspect, as not doing his duty as
_nako[u]do_. Look to yourselves. If she ever gets suspicious of the real
facts, has an inkling of the truth--look out for yourselves."

Kwaiba was thoughtful; Iémon was indifferent. None of them could think
of aught but the venture already engaged in. A week, ten days, passed.
In that time every effort was made to move O'Iwa to consent to a
divorce. As _Kumi-gashira_, Kwaiba summoned her to his house. Before his
kindly sympathy O'Iwa melted into tears. The scandalous treatment of
Iémon had reached his ears. Why had he not heard of it before it reached
such extremes? He looked indignation at his messenger, the one who had
brought O'Iwa to his presence, Akiyama Cho[u]zaémon the neighbour of
Tamiya, living not far off near the Ten-o[u]. Said the ward
head--"Kwaiba always took this Iémon, or Kazuma, for a scoundrel. A
stranger, why bring him into the ward? But now he is master of Tamiya.
In the place of the excellent, if obstinate, Matazaémon. Alas! The
pension of the House is said to be hypothecated for five years. And the
household goods; and separate properties of Tamiya--all gone?" O'Iwa
nodded assent, and Kwaiba threw up his hands at such wickedness. At all
events he counselled her to consider matters, to accept his aid. He
would place her somewhere; in the country and far off from the ward in
which Iémon as master of Tamiya in its degradation would always be an
unpleasant sight and influence in her life; at least until Iémon could
be expelled. With the fellow's past career doubtless this would happen
before long. Meanwhile O'Iwa was to pass into one of the wretched,
overworked, exhausted drudges on one of Kwaiba's Shimosa farms. From his
chief's expressed views Cho[u]zaémon dissented. This was the one man
O'Iwa distrusted. He had always shown dislike to her. In defense of her
conduct Cho[u]zaémon was too clever to show any warmth. He was the
subordinate making exact report to his chief. O'Iwa was completely taken
in. This friendly neutrality aroused her every grateful feeling. Said
Cho[u]zaémon--"Iémon is a coward. A _samurai_ beats neither woman nor
dog. If either are unfaithful to him, he kills the offender. Iémon's
conduct has been thoroughly bad. Before the reproaches of O'Iwa San,
beaten in argument he has retaliated by beating her to a jelly. Her face
bears the marks of his violence. As to her body, my wife answers for it
that it is a mass of bruises."--"Is that so?" said Kwaiba in deep
sympathy. O'Iwa burst into tears. Kwaiba fumed with rage--"Truly Iémon
is not a human being. He has the horns of a demon."

Then the priest Myo[u]zen, of the family temple, the Myo[u]gyo[u]ji of
Samégabashi,[25] appeared at the Samoncho[u] house. To him O'Iwa looked
for ghostly consolation against the ills of this world. Instead he
merely chanted the old refrain, harped on the scandal brought on
Samoncho[u] by the continued bickering of the married pair. Husband and
wife had mutual duty toward each other; but also there was a duty toward
their neighbours. Iémon was irreclaimable.... This stranger! O'Iwa San
should deign to take the active part herself; not afford this ill
spectacle and example to the ward. Like most parsons he was convinced by
the noise of his own voice, and spoke with the intense conviction of
long rehearsal. O'Iwa heard him out with a curious chill at heart. The
graves of her beloved _hotoké_ (departed ones) were in the cemetery of
Myo[u]gyo[u]ji. The temple had been one of the few generous features,
almost extravagances, of Matazaémon. It had profited greatly by his
donations. It was the honour of the House against the argument of the
priest and the convenience of the neighbours; and all because a bad man
had been brought into it. "What the revered _osho[u]_ (prebend) has said
reaches to the heart of this Iwa. Submission is to be an inspiration
from the revered _hotoké_. Iwa will seek their counsel." Baffled, the
priest left the house; veiled censure was on his lips; open disobedience
and contempt on the part of O'Iwa.

Said Kwaiba--"Cho[u]zaémon has failed. At least this Kwaiba has saved
his ten _ryo[u]_--and gained one object. Kondo[u] Dono, thanks for your
kind hospitality to O'Hana San. Do you propose to adopt her?" Kondo[u]
made an emphatic gesture of protest and dissent. He said--"At least
Kondo[u] has the security of goods and money for his generous
expenditures."--"Both of them belonging to O'Iwa San; just as Kwaiba
holds the acknowledgment of Akiyama San." Cho[u]zaémon made a wry face.
The prospect of pressure put on him, with all the added accumulation of
the months of interest, was not a cheerful one. Said Kwaiba
angrily--"Ah! Whoever would have suspected such obstinacy in the O'Baké;
she who always was so yielding within her home and outside of it. She
seemed to be such an easy mark. It was merely a matter of ordering her
out. And now she baffles this Kwaiba of his revenge!" Iémon laughed
outright. Kwaiba looked at him with surprise. Was this charlatan playing
a double game? Said Iémon--"Fear enters at the words of the honoured
chief. Pray condescend to be easy in mind. As yet Cho[u]zaémon has not
failed. At least the question can be argued with the _Kumi-gashira_. It
is left to these principals. Iémon is of better counsel." Then after a
silence during which Kwaiba intently eyed him--"To-morrow O'Iwa San
leaves Yotsuya. Kwaiba Dono gets his revenge on the late master of
Tamiya. Pray remember it, in favour of the present incumbent of the
House." Said Kwaiba fervently--"Iémon would be a son to Kwaiba! Is it
really true--that the O'Baké will be expelled the ward, in disgrace?"
Iémon nodded assent.

On the following day O'Iwa had completed her ablutions. She arrayed
herself in freshly washed robes. Then she took her place before the
Butsudan. It was memorial day of the decease of the _hotoké_. Earnestly
she prayed--"Deign, honoured _hotoké_, to have regard to this Iwa. The
year has not lapsed since the hand of Iwa was placed in that of Iémon.
Now the House is brought to ruin. No heir appears to console this Iwa
and to continue its worship, to inherit its revenues. 'Take these in
hand. Life lies before Iémon for their enjoyment. His revenue will be
ample. Deign but to have the honour of the House in mind, the
continuance of its line as object.' Such were the words of the honoured
Matazaémon when in life. Unworthy has been the conduct of this trust by
Iémon. But divorce is a scandal, always to be avoided by a woman. Return
the love of Iémon to this Iwa. Deign, honoured _hotoké_, to influence
his wandering passions toward this child of the House. Cause the husband
to return to Tamiya, once more to uphold its rights and influence. Such
is the prayer of this Iwa." She rose, placed the offerings, and struck
the little bell with the hammer. As she did so a noise was heard at the
entrance. Iémon, carrying fishing rod and basket, and followed by
Natsumé Kyuzo[u] and Imaizumi Jinzaémon, burst into the room. All three
were more or less drunk. Dumfounded O'Iwa looked from one to the other.
Imaizumi carried a tub. Kyuzo[u] knocked it from his shoulders. Then
tumbled clumsily down on the cask. None of them had removed the dirty
_waraji_ (straw sandals) they wore. "Why do so in such a barn?"
hiccoughed Kyuzo[u]. "And this _saké_; Kyuzo[u] found it without, at the
kitchen door. Jinzaémon shouldered it. Whence does it come, Iémon San?
Faugh! It smells as if the cask had been placed for the convenience of
passers-by on the wayside. It stinks. That's what it does." He gave the
cask a kick, knocking out the bung. The filthy liquid poured out on the
floor.

Iémon appropriated the tub. He seated himself on it. "'Tis the fine
liquor of Tamiya. All the house possesses. Iémon is hungry." Opening his
basket he took out an eel. He began to skin it. A cry from O'Iwa
arrested him. His wife sank down before him in attitude of prayer.
"Importunate jade! What would you now? Further advice to a husband who
wants but to get rid of the sight of an ugly face? Bah! This lump of a
wench is neither good for child-bearing nor for house-keeping; she is
not even a good _rusu_ (care-taker)." His knife made a rip in the skin
of the squirming animal. O'Iwa laid a hand on his sleeve. With a voice
in which sobs mingled with the petition--"To-day is a memorial day of
the honoured _Hotoké Sama_. Deign to refrain from taking life in the
house; nay, before the very _ihai_ in the Butsudan. Such deed will cause
pain to the _Hotoké Sama_; bring disaster on the House, perhaps on this
Iwa and Iémon San." Iémon fairly roared as he sprang up from the
tub--"What! You noisy slut! Is this Iémon to go without food because the
_hotoké_ dislikes the smell of eels?... Jinzaémon, can you cook eels?"
Imaizumi had sought the _ro[u]ka_. His round featureless face showed his
fright and indecision before this critical quarrel of husband and wife.
Of all involved in the plot he was the most unwilling in performance of
his rôle. But he answered according to rote--"Iya! Iémon Uji, the office
of cook is a special one. Jinzaémon is no cook. He leaves that office to
his wife. Moreover the cooking of eels is an art in itself."--"And the
artist is here," chimed in the malignancy of Kyuzo[u]. "O'Iwa San is
noted for her skill."--"Right!" said Iémon. "Kyuzo[u] and Jinzaémon have
heard the refusal of O'Iwa. Cook this eel--or else Iémon pronounces the
formula of divorce against the disobedient wife."

In silence O'Iwa rose. She went to the portable stove. With the bellows
she stirred up the fire therein. She did not dare even for a moment to
pray at the Butsudan. The skillet was on the fire. The eels were
sizzling in the hot liquor. Suddenly Iémon made an exclamation. Taking a
towel he grasped the handle of the vessel. The next moment he had forced
down the hot pan and its contents on the head of O'Iwa. "Kiya!" With the
single cry she fell over backwards, writhing in pain under the
infliction of the scalding mess streaming over face, neck, and bosom.
Imaizumi fled in dismay. Even Natsumé Kyuzo[u] protested. Seizing the
arm of Iémon--"Iémon Uji, you go too far. Don't kill her." "Kill the
O'Baké? It's impossible." Iémon spoke coldly. He was the one person of
collected wits in the room.

Groaning with agony O'Iwa came to her senses. A man was leaning over
her. Half blind as she was, she could recognize Cho[u]bei. His look was
grave. His voice was reticent and confused. "What has been going on
here, O'Iwa Dono? Ah! Cho[u]bei comes at a bad season. Ma! Ma! The
house, too; stripped bare to the very boards, and the season still
wintry. Truly this Iémon is a beast--a very brute (_chikusho[u]_). What
is Cho[u]bei to do? There is this matter of the honour of Tamiya." He
wrung his hands as in great perplexity, glancing sideways toward O'Iwa.
The first part of his speech she disregarded. Such talk and consolation
were growing stale. That all should pity her caused no surprise. Her
situation was not unusual. It was the last words which caught her ear.
"The honour of Tamiya: Cho[u]bei San?" Cho[u]bei turned away; to put
some peppermint in his eyes. Tears stood in them as he turned again to
her. O'Iwa was alarmed. "What has happened?" She caught his sleeve, drew
close to him. He answered--"Cho[u]bei cannot speak. To find O'Iwa San in
such dreadful state renders it impossible to explain. Iémon San has gone
too far." So he had, from Cho[u]bei's point of view and for his
purposes. These young fellows never can keep within bounds; even in
abuse of a woman. His resentment was extreme. O'Iwa insisted. Finally
the resistance of Cho[u]bei was overcome. Iémon's name was posted at the
Kuramaé of Asakusa. He was in debt on every side. As the final blow, he
had stolen the seal of Ito[u] Kwaiba and forged an acknowledgment for
twenty _ryo[u]_. Kwaiba's enmity to Matazaémon was well known. He liked
Iémon no better, and would pursue him to the end, force him to cut
belly, and accomplish the official degradation and extinction of the
Tamiya House (_kaieki_). "What is to be done?" He turned squarely to
O'Iwa. She said--"Ito[u] Dono has been kind to O'Iwa. Perhaps if request
be made...." Cho[u]bei laughed. "Ito[u] Kwaiba is always kind to a
woman. It is not O'Iwa San whom he hates. But this is an affair between
men. He secures vengeance on Matazaémon through Iémon and this official
extinction of Tamiya. It is too tempting. He is not to be trusted. No
hint of the deed must reach him. Is there no money at the command of
O'Iwa San? The sum is but twenty _ryo[u]_. Iémon brought this news to
Cho[u]bei last night. He leaves Edo, to go in hiding, after ... after
... punishing the ... Well! Well! He is a wicked man. Cho[u]bei never
suspected such wickedness. But Iémon is not the issue. He represents and
can disgrace the Tamiya. There lies the issue. Has O'Iwa San no means,
nothing in coin?"--"Less than a _bu_, sixty _mon_." She held out the
coppers to Cho[u]bei.

Said Cho[u]bei with decision--"There is one resource left. There is
the person of O'Iwa San. Deign to go into service at the pleasure
quarter. Cho[u]bei is skilful. In seven days these wounds can be healed.
Twenty _ryo[u]_ secured, the paper is taken up, the robbery of the seal
is never discovered. We can laugh at Kwaiba's anger. All is for the
Tamiya." He noted that O'Iwa was hesitating--"It is but as a pledge. The
money is advanced on the person of O'Iwa San. A week, ten days, and
other sources of loan will be discovered. This is the only measure
Cho[u]bei can suggest. He has no means of his own to meet this debt." He
smiled as at a thought--"Perhaps Kwaiba himself will pay his own debt!"
He chuckled at the idea. "Why not make appeal at once?" repeated O'Iwa,
grasping at any straw of safety from this resource, so horrible to the
_samurai_ woman. Said Cho[u]bei promptly--"Ito[u] Sama knows perfectly
well the state of Samoncho[u]. Asakusa, Honjo[u], are far removed. An
appeal for twenty _ryo[u]_ as surety money in applying for a situation
would appeal to him; the other would not. Besides, thus far away he
could not investigate closely, if he would. He could but say 'yes' or
'no.'" O'Iwa remembered what Kwaiba had said--the necessity of removing
to a distance. The words and actions of these rascals dove-tailed
admirably. A long silence followed. With exultation at heart Cho[u]bei
saw her rise. She put out the fire, gathered together the few personal
articles she still possessed. On seeing her struggle with the heavy rain
doors he came to her aid. "For the time being accept the hospitality of
Cho[u]bei's poor quarters. These wounds are to be healed." With full
heart O'Iwa gratefully accepted. She took his hand as if to kiss it.
Cho[u]bei hastily snatched it away. In his sleeve, the ink not
twenty-four hours old, was the paper of the sale of O'Iwa to Cho[u]bei;
her passing over to his guardianship, to dispose of as a street harlot,
a night-hawk. The consideration? Five _ryo[u]_: payment duly
acknowledged, and of course nominal. The paper of transfer was in
thoroughly correct form. Cho[u]bei had drawn it himself.




CHAPTER XIII

THE YO[U]TAKA (NIGHT-HAWKS) OF HONJO[U]


O'Iwa's stay of nearly seven days at Cho[u]bei's house was one of the
golden periods of her life. O'Taki received the Ojo[u]san with humble
joy. Iémon could not drop Cho[u]bei out of his life of prosperity. O'Iwa
was soon brought in contact with the humble pair in adversity. Hers was
a generous heart, and O'Taki could not look around her house without
some indication of this kindness. Her sympathy with the wronged wife was
great. A husband--thriftless, a gambler, inconsiderate--of such a one
she had some experience. By the same means this lady was brought to her
present pass. It roused her indignation. As to brutality; that was
another matter. She squared her stout shoulders and looked derisively at
the loose angularity of Cho[u]bei, his rickety physique. But the storm
would pass. Ito[u] Sama, Kondo[u] Sama, Myo[u]zen Osho[u], all these
were agreed. The Ojo[u]san now out of his reach, without a home to go
to, and only hostile faces met with in the ward, Iémon Sama would soon
come to terms. Would the Ojo[u]san deign to honour their humble home as
long as she liked. She at once suppressed O'Iwa's rather futile attempts
to aid in her rough household work. It had been the lady's part to
direct her maids in their more repugnant tasks, and now brought right
under her hand in this plebeian household. O'Iwa never had undergone the
harsher lot of her mother O'Mino.

Cho[u]bei in his way was as kind as his wife. At once he devoted
himself to the repair of his property. When O'Iwa produced the paste and
lotion of Suian Sensei, as sovereign for the complexion, Cho[u]bei took
them, smelled and carefully tasted, and finally put some of the paste on
the end of the _hashi_ or sticks to arrange the charcoal in the
_hibachi_. A smell of garlic pervaded the room. He noted the puffy face
of O'Iwa, the unnatural, almost ghastly, white of the skin where the
wide pockmarks permitted it to be seen. Within the circles of these
scars there was a curious striated effect, only seen at times in the
efforts of artists to depict the supernatural, or of savages to frighten
their foes. It gave a drawn cadaverous look to the lower part of the
face. "There is more in it than _that_," mused Cho[u]bei. During her
stay O'Iwa had one of her attacks--of nerves--in fact a true epileptic
seizure. Cho[u]bei put an embargo at once on all remedies but his own.
Cynically, he added--"But elsewhere there will be no Cho[u]bei. If the
Okusama deigns to apply the drugs of Suian Sensei where she now goes,
doubtless she will find early relief. At present they spoil Cho[u]bei's
efforts." The clever rascal at once recognized his fellow in Suian,
bribed to render O'Iwa more hideous than Nature had made her, to take
away her womanhood and hope of an heir to the Tamiya. To poison her?
That he doubted; although the ignorance of leech and victim might
readily lead to such result.

Within the seven days O'Iwa San once more could show herself in public.
It was now Cho[u]bei's part to carry the plot to completion. Iémon, at
the proposition, had said--"Sell her as a night-hawk! An ugly woman like
that no one will approach."--"'Tis Cho[u]bei's trade," said the pimp
coolly. "In Yoshidamachi they have noses--over night. Between dark and
dawn the member melts, becomes distorted, and has to be made. It has
served its purpose. This is Cho[u]bei's affair. Provided that O'Iwa
never again troubles the presence of Iémon Sama the object is
attained."--"That is true. Do what you please. Kill her, if desired.
O'Iwa in the Yotsuya; and Cho[u]bei feels the wrath of Ito[u] Dono, of
this Iémon." Unwillingly he signed the contract required by Cho[u]bei.
He gave the latter a fee of ten _ryo[u]_ for the excision of this
excrescence, and with a sigh of joy learned of the disappearance in
company of the pimp and O'Iwa. Within three days carpenters and other
workmen swarmed over the Tamiya in Samoncho[u]. The master made ready
for his return.

O'Taki had gone forth on a mission for Cho[u]bei. This would insure her
absence for the greater part of the day. Said Cho[u]bei--"Deign,
Okusama, to allow Cho[u]bei to prove his art. All his accomplishments
have not been displayed." To pass off the ugly woman at night could be
done. He was compelled to act by daylight; though relying somewhat on
the dusky interior of Toémon's entrance and reception room. This Toémon
was the chief of the guild which bought and controlled these unfortunate
street-walkers, lowest of their class. Cho[u]bei sat down before O'Iwa.
As if in an actor's room he was surrounded with a battery of brushes and
spatulas, pastes, paints of all shades of greys, flesh colour,
pinks--even reds. Under his skilful hands O'Iwa was transformed. To make
her beautiful was impossible. He made her passable. The weather was
cold, though spring was now close at hand. Cho[u]bei hesitated. The walk
was a long one. His handiwork might fade or melt under the sweating
induced by effort. Besides he had no desire for conversation. There were
to be as few answers to curious questions as possible. In his house he
had left the two women to themselves, and saw O'Iwa only when O'Taki was
present. So he called a _kago_ and gave the necessary directions. As the
coolies moved off with their fair burden he trotted along in the rear,
his project occupying his busy mind.

The place of Toémon was at Yoshidacho[u] Nicho[u]me, in the centre of
the Warigesui district. To the north was the canal of that name. To the
south a second canal ditto; the second stream was the larger, fairer,
and more pretentious South Warigesui. An equal distance to the east was
the Ho[u]onji Bashi, with the great temple of that name just across the
bounding river or canal of the district. As the _kago_ bearers ambled
down the bank of the North Warigesui, O'Iwa thought she had never seen a
more filthy stream than this back-water with its stale current. The
bearers put them down at the canal. Cho[u]bei had some directions to
give during the short walk of a couple of hundred yards to their
destination. Said he--"For a _samurai_ woman to engage in this business
is a serious offence. After all the matter is mere form; a pledge to
secure the return of the sealed paper forged by the husband. The wife
performs her highest duty in saving the honour of the House. Is not that
true?" There was a little sob in O'Iwa's voice as she gave assent. She
felt different now that she was close at hand to the scene and crisis of
her trial. Continued Cho[u]bei--"The agreement has been made out as with
O'Iwa, daughter of Kanémon, the younger brother of this Cho[u]bei and
green-grocer of Abegawacho[u] of Asakusa. Deign to remember that the
twenty _ryo[u]_ is needed to save a father in peril of default and
imprisonment."--"The cases are not so different," whispered O'Iwa. "Just
so," said Cho[u]bei. "Here is the place. Condescend to wait a moment,
here at the entrance." Briskly he entered the house. "A request to
make!"--"Ah! Is it Cho[u]bei San? The Danna Sama is absent for the day,
at the office of the ward magistrate. Some drunkard considers that he
has been robbed. The girl he accused was punished--perhaps unjustly. All
the women of this house are honest."--"Beyond repair," laughed
Cho[u]bei. "However, the other matter has been agreed on. The girl is
here. An uncontrollable jade! The master has deigned to aid Cho[u]bei.
Thanks are felt. Since she will run with the men, it is as well for
Kanémon to get the profit of the business. If she breaks out--put a ring
in her nose, and treat her as the farmers treat their cattle. Don't let
her again bother home or Cho[u]bei. She will lie--of course. At Toémon's
they are used to lies?" The woman Matsu laughed--"No fear as to that."
She looked over the contract with care. "Ah! She is sold for life
service; otherwise the twenty _ryo[u]_ would be a scandalous price. Is
that her?... Um! Not a likely jade. Stand a little in the light.... This
Matsu would never have closed the bargain without a view. But Toémon San
has left no choice. In the scarcity of women, and his good-will to
Cho[u]bei San, he would pay any sum. At twenty _ryo[u]_ she is a gem!
You can come up here. Také! Haru! A new girl. Take her in charge and
show her the house and its ways.... Cho[u]bei San, some tea." Cho[u]bei
put a word into this running comment and invitation. As the girls were
leading off the hesitating O'Iwa he said loudly and roughly--"Remember
to obey the Okamisan (wife) in everything. Whatever she commands is
right and must be done: no nonsense. Ah! Something forgotten: a moment
please." He drew O'Iwa aside, seeing that she was on the verge of tears.
Speaking gently--"Be astonished at nothing; be ignorant of everything.
The house of Toémon in Honjo[u] is not the drawing room of Tamiya in
Yotsuya. Deign to remember that Cho[u]bei must play his part. Life is
like an excursion in a pleasure boat. There are rough places to pass,
some danger, and much refuse to get rid of. Condescend to have House and
husband in mind. It is but for a week--or so."--"And Iémon San, the
House; they will be secure?"--"That Cho[u]bei is assured of. See: he has
the twenty _ryo[u]_ in hand. It is mere matter of securing the
compromising paper and the return of Iémon. Some negotiations are
necessary for that. In the future his behaviour will be much improved."
He clinked the coin before her. As O'Iwa passed up the stairs he
returned to the _hibachi_ of the wife. The tea was a short course.
Cho[u]bei was on needles while drinking it. He feared an outbreak from
above in the course of O'Iwa's initiation into a vileness the depth of
which she never even could suspect. "Yes: trade is good. Women are
difficult to secure. The men prefer to have them in their homes, rather
than to gain by their service elsewhere." In such professional talk of a
few moments he quickly dispatched the refreshment, climbed into his
clogs, and departed. O'Iwa had disappeared far into the depths.

Toémon and his wife were quarrelling. Said the woman--"Are you mad, to
pay twenty _ryo[u]_ for such an ugly wench? No choice was given. This
Matsu was to receive her. Cho[u]bei is a cheat." Toémon and the
_banto[u]_ drew O'Iwa under the light, much as if she were a bag of
rice--"The clever rascal! From crown of the head to neck she is all made
up. And perhaps elsewhere."--"At all events she is a woman." The
_banto[u]_ spoke as in doubt. "Never mind: we are great artists, too, if
not so good at cheating as this Cho[u]bei. Twenty-six years! She's forty
at least.... What may be your honoured age?"--"Twenty-six years,"
replied the distressed O'Iwa. The wife threw up her hands--"And she does
not lie!... Haru! Ko[u]ta! It is time to go out. The bell already
strikes the hour of the dog (7 P.M.). Take Iwa to the reception room
(_yoséba_). She is to learn the ways of the place; where to entertain
her guests.... Come! Along with all of you!" Some ten or fifteen women
had gathered in their array for their night's campaign. Paint, powder,
plaster, disguised the ravages of disease among the hardened set of this
low class house. O'Iwa accompanied O'Haru to what had been called the
_yoséba_. The girl explained to her. Here was the place to bring and
entertain any guest picked up on the street. They were not the degraded
wretches who made the darkness of an alleyway the reception room for
their lovers. It was to be remembered that the wine drunk not only
profited the house, but paid in commissions for their own cosmetics and
other little gratifications. On entering the place O'Iwa shrank back to
the wall in horror; to shrink away in turn from the filth and obscenity
to be seen on that support. She would have fled, but the entering crowd
pressed her further in. It was a long room. The entrance formed a sort
of parlour or place to sit. The rest of the apartment was divided
longitudinally into little cubicula, rooms of the space of the one dirty
mat with which each was furnished. A shelf contained its cynically
filthy and suggestive furniture.

O'Iwa's disgust and terror was too obvious. O'Haru held on to her arm
to prevent flight. The attention of the others was drawn to them. "Does
the beauty want an apartment to herself? That is the privilege of the
Oiran, the Go Tayu, the Kashiku.[26] Ah! Sister dear; it is to be
learned that this place is Hell--First Block. There is no 'second block'
(nicho[u]mé). One gets used to anything here; even to use a demon's
horns for toothpicks." Thus spoke a hard-faced woman of some thirty odd,
by her looks. Said the frightened O'Iwa in low tones--"Iwa has not come
for this service. She is but a pledge. This redeemed, within the week
she returns to her home. This place upsets one's stomach." Those present
laughed loudly. "We all say that. The real reason for our coming is not
to be told. Be assured that you must perform the service, or suffer.
Condescend not to fall into the hands of the Okamisan. In anger she is
terrible." There was a general movement of the women. Said O'Haru,
drawing along O'Iwa by the hand--"Come! Make no trouble. A newcomer, you
are sure to be successful and please Matsu Dono." O'Iwa resolutely held
back. No matter what the suffering she would undergo it. Ah! A week in
this place indeed was to be life in Hell. She called up the sight of the
dismantled house, the figure of her grandfather, anything to strengthen
her will to resist. O'Haru left the room. "Okamisan, the new girl
refuses to serve. Haru makes report." The wife of Toémon leaped up from
her cushion. Dressed in night clothes, a long pipe in hand, she rushed
into the room. "What nonsense is this? Which slut is it that refuses the
service of the house?... You! The ink on the receipt for twenty _ryo[u]_
paid for your ugly face and body is hardly dry.... Pledge? A week's
service? You lie: as your uncle said you would lie. You are here for
life service as a street harlot. Out with you!... No? No?" She was about
to throw herself on O'Iwa, to cast her into the street. Then her
passion, to outward appearance, cooled. She was the woman of her
business, malevolent and without pity. "O'Kin! O'Kin!" The others now
gathered around O'Iwa. O'Haru and the girl O'Také plead with her to
obey. They tried to hustle her off by force. Said O'Haru--"Report had to
be made. This Haru acted for the best. Truly such obstinacy deserves
punishment. But Haru is filled with pity. Deign to obey. Go forth to the
service. The result of refusal is terrible." O'Iwa shook her
head--"O'Haru San is free from blame. Iwa is grateful for the kind
words. To go out to this service is impossible." The woman O'Kin strode
into the room; a big, strapping wench, and the understudy of O'Matsu in
her husband's affections. "A new recruit?" She spoke in inquiry--"Yes:
and obstinate. It is a matter of punishment in the _seméba_.... Now! Out
with you all! No dawdling!" The irate woman turned on her flock. They
fled like sheep into the open.




CHAPTER XIV

THE PUNISHMENT


O'Iwa did not move. The two women approached and laid hands on her. Her
yielding made no difference in the roughness of their treatment.
Dragged, hustled, shoved, with amplitude of blows, she was already much
bruised on reaching the place of punishment--the _seméba_, to use the
technical term of these establishments "for the good of the community."
During a temporary absence of the mistress, a ray of kindliness seemed
to touch the woman O'Kin. She pointed to the square of some six feet, to
the rings fastened in the rafters. "Don't carry self-will to extremes.
Here you are to be stripped, hauled up to those rings, and beaten until
the bow breaks. Look at it and take warning. Kin is no weakling." She
shoved back her sleeve, showing an arm as hard and brawny as that of a
stevedore. With disapproval she observed O'Iwa. The latter stood
unresisting, eyes on the ground. Only the lips twitched from time to
time. As the only person in the house, male or female, not to fear the
Okamisan, O'Kin could only put down the courage to ignorance. She
shrugged her shoulders with contempt. "A man would cause you no pain.
The same cannot be said of Kin. You shall have the proof." Perhaps
severity would be more merciful, by quickly breaking down this
obstinacy.

The wife returned with the instrument of torture, a bow of bamboo wound
with rattan to strengthen it. O'Kin took it, ostentatiously bent and
displayed its stinging flexibility before the eyes of O'Iwa. The latter
closed them. She would cut off all temptation to weakness. At a sign O'Kin
roughly tore off the _obi_. A twist, and the torn and disordered _kimono_
of O'Iwa fell to her feet with the skirt. She had no shirt. Thus she was
left completely naked. In modesty she sank crouching on the ground. The
cold wind of the March night made her shiver as O'Kin roped her wrists.
Again the woman whispered her counsel in her ear--"When you get enough,
say 'Un! Un!'" Detecting no sign of consent she took a ladder, climbed up,
and passed the ropes through the rings above. She descended, and the two
women began to haul away. Gradually O'Iwa was raised from the sitting
posture to her full height of extended arms, until by effort her toes
could just reach the ground. In this painful position the slightest twist
to relieve the strain on the wrists caused agonizing pains through the
whole body. "Still obstinate--strike!" shouted the wife. O'Kin raised the
bow and delivered the blow with full force across the buttocks. A red
streak appeared. O'Iwa by a natural contortion raised her legs. The blows
descended fast, followed at once by the raised welt of flesh, or the blood
from the lacerated tissue. Across the shoulder blades, the small of the
back, the buttocks, the belly, they descended with the full force of the
robust arms and weight of O'Kin. Every time the legs were raised at the
shock the suspended body spun round. Every time the toes rested on the
ground the bow descended with merciless ferocity. The sight of the torture
roused the fierce spirit in the tormentors. O'Kin redoubled the violence
of her blows, seeking out the hams and the withers, the shoulders, the
tenderest points to cause pain. The wife ran from side to side, gazing
into the face and closed eyes of O'Iwa, trying to detect weakening under
the torture, or result from some more agonizing blow. O'Iwa's body was
striped and splashed with red. O'Kin's hands slipped on the wet surface of
the rod. Suddenly she uttered an exclamation. Blood was now gushing from
the nose, the eyes, the mouth of O'Iwa. "Okamisan! Okamisan! It won't do
to kill her. Deign to give the order to cease. She must be lowered." The
wife coolly examined the victim. "She has fainted. Lower her, and throw
salt water over her. The sting will bring her to." O'Kin followed the
instructions in the most literal sense. She dashed the bucket of water
with great impetus right into O'Iwa's face. "Un!" was the latter's
exclamation as she came to consciousness. "She consents! She consents!"
cried O'Kin with delight. The wife was decidedly sceptical, but her aid
plainly would go no further at this time. Said she--"Leave her as she is.
There are other matters to attend to than the whims of an idle vicious
jade. She would cheat this Matsu out of twenty _ryo[u]_? Well: time will
show the victor." She departed--"to drink her wine, pare her nails, and
sing obscene songs to the accompaniment of the _samisen_."

Tied hand and foot O'Iwa lay semi-conscious in the cold shed of
punishment. At midnight the girls returned to this "home." They gathered
around the prostate O'Iwa. From O'Kin they had an inkling of the courage
displayed. They admired her, but none dared to touch her bonds. At last
O'Haru San, unusually successful in her night's raid, ventured to
approach the half drunk mistress of the house. "Haru makes report." She
spread her returns before the gratified Okamisan. Timidly the girl
added--"O'Iwa San repents. Deign to remit her punishment. She looks very
ill and weak."--"Shut up!" was the fierce retort. Then as afterthought
of sickness and possible loss came to mind. "She can be untied and sent
to bed."--"And food?"--"She can earn it." The woman turned on O'Haru,
who bowed humbly and slipped away. That night the girls contributed from
their store to feed O'Iwa; as they did on the succeeding days and
nights. The wife would have stopped the practice, but Toémon interfered.
He meant to keep his dilapidated stock in as good repair as possible. He
fed them pretty well. "The woman is not to be starved--at least too
openly. The last case gave this Toémon trouble enough, and on the very
day this epileptic came into the house, to bring confusion with her.
Beat her if you will; but not enough to kill her." O'Matsu followed his
words to the letter. One beating was followed by another; with interval
enough between the torture to insure recuperation and avoid danger to
life. These scenes came to be regarded as a recreation of the house. The
other inmates were allowed to attend, to witness the example and
fascinate their attention. But at last the Okamisan despaired. Amusement
was one thing; but her hatred of O'Iwa was tempered by the desire to
find some use for her, to get a return for the twenty _ryo[u]_ of which
she had been swindled. Finally the advice of the _banto[u]_ was
followed. "The men of the house cannot be tempted to approach such an
apparition. The other girls have not time to devote to making up O'Iwa
as for the stage. They have not twenty _ryo[u]_ at stake, as had
Cho[u]bei. Let her wash the dishes." Thus was O'Iwa "degraded" from her
high estate as street-walker. Turned into a kitchen drudge she shed
tears of joy. She almost forgot the matter of the pledge in this new and
pleasant life. The time and the place, perhaps the drug she took, had
done their work on the mind of O'Iwa. Iémon, the house of Samoncho[u],
the _ihai_ in the Butsudan, the pleasant garden--all were of the tissue
of a dream amid a toil which deposited her on the straw wrappings of the
charcoal and in a shed, thoroughly worn out at the end of her long day.
The O'Iwa of Samoncho[u] at this end of the lapsing year of service was
dormant. But accidents will happen.

There was excitement in the house. Mobei, the dealer in toilet
articles--combs, brushes, jewel strings--was at the grating. The women
were clustered before the wares he exposed in his trays. This Mobei, as
dealer in toilet articles (_koma-mono_) wandered all the wards of Edo,
his little trays fitting neatly into each other, and wrapped in a
_furoshiki_ or bundle-handkerchief. His wares formed a marvellous
collection of the precious and common place, ranging from true coral and
tortoise shell, antique jewelry and curious _netsuké_ of great value, to
their counterfeits in painted wood, horn, and coloured glass. "Mobei
San, long has been the wait for you. Is there a bent comb in
stock?"--"Truly this Mobei is vexing. He humbly makes apology, lady.
Here is just the thing.... How much? Only a _bu_.... Too high? Nay! With
women in the ordinary walks of life it is the wage of a month. To the
honoured Oiran it is but a night's trifling." The other women tittered.
O'Haru was a little nettled at the high sounding title of Oiran. She
would not show her irritation. Mobei continued his attentions. He laid
before her and the others several strings of jewels, their "coral" made
of cleverly tinted paste. "Deign to look; at but one _bu_ two _shu[u]_.
If real they would cost twenty _ryo[u]_."--"And Mobei has the real?" The
dealer laughed. As in pity, and to give them a glimpse of the far off
upper world, he raised the cover of a box in the lower tier. They gasped
in admiration before the pink of the true coral. Hands were stretched
through the grating to touch it. Mobei quickly replaced the cover. "For
some great lady," sighed O'Haru--"Just so," replied Mobei, adjusting his
boxes. He had sold two wooden painted combs and a string of horn beads
in imitation of tortoise shell. He pocketed the hundred "cash," those
copper coins with a hole in the centre for stringing. Then briefly--"The
necklace is for no other than the Kashiku of the Yamadaya, the loved one
of Kibei Dono of Yotsuya. The comb (_kanzashi_) in tortoise shell and
gold is for the honoured lady wife of Iémon Dono, the _go kenin_. But
Mobei supplies not only the secular world. This--for one who has left
the world; for Myo[u]zen Osho[u] of Myo[u]gyo[u]ji, the gift of Ito[u]
Dono. For the custom of Mobei the Yotsuya stands first in order." He
took a box from his sleeve and showed them the rosary of pure crystal
beads. Even in the dull light of a lowering day the stones flashed and
sparkled. The women showed little interest. A priest to them was not a
man--ordinarily.

He shouldered his pack. "Mobei San--a comb with black spots, in
imitation of tortoise shell. Please don't fail me on the next visit."
Mobei nodded agreement. Then he halted and turned. One of the women had
called out in derision--"Here is O'Iwa San. Surely she wants to
purchase. Mobei San! Mobei San! A customer with many customers and a
full pocketbook." These women looked on O'Iwa's assignment to the
kitchen as the fall to the lowest possible state. At sight of the
newcomer Mobei gasped. O'Iwa on leaving the door of Toémon's house,
_miso_ (soup) strainers for repair in one hand, fifteen _mon_ for bean
paste (_to[u]fu_) tightly clasped in the other, came face to face with
the toilet dealer, "The lady of Tamiya--here!"--"The lady of Tamiya!"
echoed the astonished and curious women. Said O'Iwa quickly--"Mobei San
is mistaken. This is Iwa; but lady of Tamiya...." Hastily she pulled her
head towel over her face. In doing so the "cash" slipped from her hand.
A _mon_ missing meant no _to[u]fu_; result, a visit to the _seméba_. In
recovering the lost coin Mobei was left in no doubt. "'Tis indeed the
lady of Tamiya. It cannot be denied." O'Iwa no longer attempted the
impossible. She said--"It is Iwa of Tamiya. Mobei San, a word with you."
The women were whispering to each other. "He called her '_shinzo[u]_.'"
Said O'Haru--"There always was something about her to arouse suspicion;
so ugly, and with such grand airs. And how she endured the punishment!
Truly she must be a _samurai_ woman." The minds of all reverted to their
master Toémon, and how he would take this news.

O'Iwa had drawn Mobei somewhat apart from the grating. With downcast
face she spoke--"Deign, Mobei San, to say nothing in the ward of this
meeting with Iwa." To Mobei's earnest gesture of comprehension--"Affairs
had gone badly with Tamiya. Iémon San was misled into gambling by
Natsumé Kyuzo[u] and Imaizumi Jinzaémon. He was carried away by the
passion. It was no longer possible to stay in Samoncho[u]. Worse conduct
followed. In the kindness and advice of Ito[u] Dono, of Akiyama and
Kondo[u] Sama, this Iwa found support. But she disobeyed. She would not
follow the advice given. However, gratitude is felt by Iwa. One cannot
leave this place, or long since she would have paid the visit of
acknowledgment. A matter of importance arose. Cho[u]bei San came to
Iwa's aid, and saved the situation. This place is terrible, but the
consequences of not coming would have been more so. To Cho[u]bei
gratitude is felt. It was the opportunity offered the wife to show her
faith and courage." Now she looked bravely in Mobei's face. It was the
toilet dealer's turn to show confusion--"Honoured lady, is nothing
known?"--"Known?" answered O'Iwa in some surprise. "What is there to
know? When this Iwa left Samoncho[u] to be sure the house was cracking
apart everywhere. The light poured in as through a bamboo door.... Ah!
Have matters gone badly with the Danna in Iwa's absence?" Mobei shook
his head in dissent. "Alas! Ito[u] Sama, Akiyama or Kondo[u] San, has
misfortune come to them, without a word of condolence from Iwa? Perhaps
Cho[u]bei San, in his precarious life...." The poor isolated world of
the thoughts of this homely creature was limited to these friends in
need.

Mobei had sunk on his knees before her. He raised eyes in which stood
tears of pity and indignation. "The Ojo[u]san knows nothing of what has
occurred in Yotsuya? This Mobei will not keep silent. With the affairs
of Iémon Sama, of Ito[u] Dono and Akiyama San nothing has gone wrong.
The absence of the lady O'Iwa is otherwise related. She has abandoned
house and husband to run away with a plebeian, the _banto[u]_ at the
green-grocer's on Shinjuku road. Such is the story circulated." O'Iwa
drew away from him as from a snake--then: "Mobei, you lie! Why tell such
a tale to this Iwa? Are not the words of Ito[u] Dono, of Akiyama Sama,
of Cho[u]bei San still in Iwa's ears? What else has she had to console
her during these bitter months but the thought of their kindness? This
dress (a scantily wadded single garment), these bare feet in this snow,
this degraded life--are not they evidences of Iwa's struggle for the
honour of husband and House? Mobei, slander of honourable men brings one
to evil. Mobei lies; lies!"

He seized her dress. The man now was weeping. "The lady of Tamiya is a
saint. Alas! Nothing does she know of the wicked hearts of men. Too
great has been the kindness of the Ojo[u]san to this Mobei for him to
attempt deceit. Deign to listen. This day a week; was it not the day to
a year of the Ojo[u]san's leaving the house in Yotsuya?" O'Iwa turned to
him with a startled face. He continued--"A week ago Mobei visited
Yotsuya. He has many customers there, not too curious about prices.
Hence he brings the best of his wares. Coming to the house in
Samoncho[u] a feast was in progress. There were present Ito[u] Dono,
Akiyama Sama, Natsumé and Imaizumi Sama, Kondo[u] Dono; O'Hana San, of
course. All were exceedingly merry, Iémon Dono poured out a cup of wine.
'Mobei! Mobei! Come here! Drain this cup in honour of the occasion. We
celebrate the anniversary of the expulsion of the _bakémono_. The demon
is driven forth from the Paradise of Yotsuya. Namu Myo[u]ho[u] Renge
Kyo[u]! Namu Myo[u]ho[u] Renge Kyo[u]!' This Mobei was amazed--'The
O'Baké.... What O'Baké?'--'Why: O'Iwa San. A year since, with the aid of
these good friends, and one not present here, Iémon freed himself from
the clutches of the vengeful apparition. Our _Kumi-gashira_ granted
divorce in due form. The son of Takahashi Daihachiro[u]--Yanagibara
Kazuma--Tamiya Iémon no longer catches at sleep to wake in fear. Chief,
deep is the gratitude of Iémon for the favour done by Ito[u] Dono.' The
Ojo[u]san a _bakémono_! At these outrageous words Mobei felt faint.
Receiving the cup, as in modesty returned to the _ro[u]ka_ to drink, the
contents were spilled on the ground. Ah! Honoured lady, it is not only
that the Ojo[u]san has been driven out. Her goods have been cleverly
stolen by false messages of gambling losses. Stored with Kondo[u] Sama
they were brought back on the success of the wicked plot. The whole is a
conspiracy of Iémon Dono with Ito[u] Dono, with Akiyama, Cho[u]bei,
Kondo[u], and others. They bragged of it, and told the tale in full
before this Mobei, laughing the while. Why, lady! On the word of
Cho[u]bei San the order of divorce was issued by Ito[u] Dono. Within the
month O'Hana San left the shelter of the house of Kondo[u] Sama to enter
the Tamiya as bride. Deign to look. Here is a jewelled comb reserved by
Iémon Sama as present for O'Hana San his wife. Here is gift of Ito[u]
Dono to Myo[u]zen Osho[u] for his efforts 'in the cause.'"

O'Iwa stood as one frozen. With Mobei's words the light was flooding
into mind and soul. Step by step she now followed clearly the stages of
this infamous conspiracy against her peace and honour. She had been
fooled, cheated, degraded--and by Ito[u] Kwaiba, the enemy of
Matazaémon; by Iémon, son of the hereditary foe Takahashi Daihachiro[u].
Mobei remained huddled at her feet, watching with fright the sudden and
awful change in her face. The words came in a whisper. At first she
brought out her speech with difficulty, then to rise to torrent
force--"Cheated, gulled by the hereditary foe! And this Iwa lies bound
and helpless! 'Tis understood! The end is at hand--Ah! The poison! The
poison! Now it, too, rises; flowing upward to heart and head of Iwa.
Accursed man! Accursed woman; who would play the rival and destroy the
wife! The time is short; the crisis is at hand. Cho[u]bei's dark words
become light. Hana would poison Iwa through this treacherous leech.
Iémon would kill her by the foul life of this brothel--Gods of Nippon!
Buddhas of the Universe! All powerful Amida, the Protector! Kwannon, the
Lady Merciful! Deign to hearken to the prayer of this Iwa. Emma
Dai-o[u], king of Hell, summon not the daughter of Tamiya before the
dreaded throne for judgment--through the course of seven
existences--until the vengeance of Iwa be sated with the miserable end
of these her persecutors. May the sacred characters of the Daimoku,
written on the heart of Iwa for her future salvation, be seared out as
with hot iron. On Ito[u] Kwaiba, Iémon, Akiyama Cho[u]zaémon, Cho[u]bei,
all and every one engaged in this vile plot, rests the death curse of
Iwa. Against these; against Natsumé, Imaizumi, Yoémon of Tamiya, lies
the grudge of Iwa of Tamiya. Gods and Buddhas--grant this prayer!"

A violent hand was laid on the bosom of Mobei's robe. He screamed in
terror at the fearful face bent over him. A broad round dead white
swollen face, too sharp gleaming malignant dots darting flashes as from
a sword between the puffed and swollen lids, froze him into a passive
object. One of these lids drooped horribly down upon the cheek of the
apparition. In the physical effort exerted, the slit of the mouth showed
the broad black even teeth, which seemed about to clutch at his throat;
as did the vigorous hand, the nails of which sank into his gullet.
Framed in the mass of wild disordered hair Mobei was isolated as in a
universe of space; left alone with this fearful vision. "Lady! Lady
O'Iwa! Lady of Tamiya! This Mobei has done naught. Others have wronged
O'Iwa San. Mobei is guiltless.... Ah! Ah!" With fright and pain he
rolled over on the ground in a dead faint. Screaming and shouting the
women Také and Ko[u]ta rushed around and out to his rescue. O'Iwa San
was now under the full control of her disorder. Takézo staggered back,
her hands to her face to hide the horrible sight, to wipe from eyes and
cheeks the blood streaming from the deep tears made by O'Iwa's nails.
Ko[u]ta from behind seized O'Iwa around the waist and shoulders. Sharply
up came the elbow shot, catching this interloper under the chin. Neck
and jaw fairly cracked under the well-delivered blow. Ko[u]ta went down
in a heap as one dead. A _chu[u]gen_ coming along the North Warigesui
had reached the crossing. He thought it better to stand aside, rather
than attempt to stop this maddened fiend tearing through space. At the
canal bank there was a moment's pause. Then came a dull splash; as of
some heavy body plunged in the water. With a cry the man hastened
forward. Not a sign of anything could be seen. In this rural place no
help was to be had, and he was little inclined to plunge at random into
the foul stream. In haste he turned back to where a crowd was gathering
around the prostrate Mobei, the groaning harlots to whom punishment had
been meted out.




CHAPTER XV

CHO[U]BEI GETS THE NEWS


The _chu[u]gen_ stood over the toilet dealer now coming out of his
half-trance condition. The eyes of the two men met and showed mutual
astonishment. "Naruhodo! Mobei San! In a quarrel over his wares with the
vile women of this district?"--"Kakusuké San! Ah! There is much to tell.
O'Iwa San...." The _chu[u]gen_ of Ito[u] Kwaiba was amazed attention.
"This Mobei to his ill fortune, met with the lady of Tamiya. Her
condition, her ignorance, was too pitiful. Learning all the truth from
Mobei she inflicted on him this punishment. May it cease there! Namu
Amida Butsu! Namu Amida Butsu!... Heavy the grudge against your master
Ito[u] Dono; against Iémon Sama, his wife O'Hana San, all in the plot
against the Lady O'Iwa. 'To seven existences grant this Iwa opportunity
to vent her anger. Every one of the perpetrators of this deed shall be
seized and put to death.' She invoked all the gods and Buddhas; Nay, the
king of Hell--Emma Dai-o[u] himself. Look to yourself, Kakusuké San.
Deign to seek employment elsewhere." Kakusuké completed his task of
raising the battered and scratched toilet dealer to his feet. "Mobei
San, you have acted the fool; without doubt. Relate what has happened."
Mobei did so in full detail. Kakusuké was thoughtful. "Much of this
Kakusuké hears for the first time. A servant gets but snatches of the
inside of such matters. Just now the mission has been from his master,
Ito[u] Dono, to the Inagaki _yashiki_ near Ho[u]onji; matter of transfer
involved in the late adoption of Kibei Dono into the House of the Danna
Sama.... So that scoundrel Cho[u]bei sold the lady of Tamiya to Toémon
for a harlot. Alas! She deserved a better fate. One way or another they
would kill her; and Cho[u]bei, his money in hand, abetted the crime.
Where is this brothel?"

Surrounded by his women Toémon was listening to their excited
statements. Takézo was crying with rage and pain, as she examined her
fissured countenance before a toilet stand (_kyo[u]dai_). Ko[u]ta,
brought back to consciousness, lay groaning in a corner. They were
applying cold compresses to her broken jaw. Toémon looked up
suspiciously as Kakusuké entered, supporting the lamed and maimed Mobei.
"Look to this man's wares, scattered in the roadway; and to the man
himself." He spoke roughly, and with authority. Toémon did not dare to
resent his manner. With well feigned solicitude he addressed Mobei--"Ma!
Ma! A terrible punishment. Your face has the blush of the plum blossom
marked upon it.... O'Haru, run to the house of Wakiyama Sensei. Ko[u]ta
is badly hurt; his skill is needed. Stop at the drug store. Here is the
'cash' to bring salve for this good man's wounds. Alas! That a woman of
Toémon's house should so maltreat others. When caught her
punishment...."--"Shut up!" said Kakusuké. He had already taken his line
of conduct in his master's interest. "How comes it that the Lady O'Iwa
is found at the house of Toémon?"--"The Lady O'Iwa!" replied the brothel
keeper in well-feigned surprise. Turning to Mobei--"It is true, then,
what the women report; that Mobei San called the O'Iwa of this house
'Shinzo[u].' Who is this O'Iwa?" Said Kakusuké coldly--"The Lady O'Iwa
is the granddaughter and heir of Tamiya Matazaémon, a higher
_do[u]shin_. She is the wife of the _go-kenin_, Tamiya Iémon."

Toémon now was truly aghast. "Heir and wife of _go-kenin_! This Toémon
had not the slightest inkling of her _status_. Cho[u]bei has juggled
this Toémon most outrageously." He turned savagely on O'Matsu. "So much
for stupid brutality. One must give you head, or have no peace. Why not
treat the woman kindly, learn her story? Lies or truth that of all the
women in the house is known. But O'Iwa San was a mark for malice.
Cho[u]bei has lied. Between you the house is ruined. Since when were
_samurai_ women sold to life service? Fool! It means imprisonment,
exile, to those implicated. This Toémon ends his days among the savage
fishermen of Sado." He would have struck her. Kakusuké and the
_banto[u]_ interposed. The woman did not budge. Defiant, she stood with
folded arms--"It was Toémon's arrangement to buy her in blind belief of
Cho[u]bei. Why blame this Matsu? Since when were women exempt from
service or punishment? The rule of the house is one or the other. How
long has it been since O'Seki left the house--in a box; and Toémon had
to make answer at the office." Then catching herself up in the presence
of strangers--"Danna Sama, this is no time for a quarrel. Those of the
house will say nothing; in their own interest. As for this worthy
gentleman, the Lady O'Iwa was wife and heir neither of himself nor his
master. Toémon San is grossly neglectful of courtesy due to guests.
Leave Mobei San to this Matsu." She whispered in his ear.

Toémon had now recovered his balance. Kakusuké was a _chu[u]gen_. He
had an object in coming to Toémon's house, instead of making report at
once to his master, to the outraged Iémon Dono. Of course Toémon
misinterepreted this motive; and Kakusuké was quite ready to profit by
his mistake. To the now courteous brothel keeper he was equally cordial.
O'Matsu and her women carried off Mobei, to salve his wounds, regale him
with fish and wine and good treatment, carefully to make inventory of
his goods, and repack them with substantial diminution of purchases.
What more could Mobei ask. His valued rosary, the necklace, the
_kanzashi_, all the treasures were uninjured. His exchequer was palpably
swollen, and more pleasingly than his phiz. His beating had turned out a
good day's venture; and without misgiving he can be left in the careful
hands of O'Matsu and her women. Meanwhile Kakusuké and Toémon sat over
their wine. From the _chu[u]gen_ and toilet dealer the latter secured a
complete view of his situation. It was bad, but not irreparable. As
Kakusuké with due tardiness prepared to depart, the hospitable innkeeper
had ample time to prostrate himself in salutation, meanwhile pushing
over a golden _ryo[u]_ wrapped up in decently thin paper which permitted
the filtering through of its yellow gleam. "Great has been the trouble
and delay of Kakusuké San. Mark not this day in memory, good Sir."
Kakusuké was equally polite in salutation--"Fear enters: thanks for the
kind entertainment of Toémon San. This alone is to be kept in mind, mark
of a day otherwise of but little import." These last words were a
healing balm; and Toémon rejoiced.

With the departure of Kakusuké, the chief of the "night-hawks" turned at
once to his aides. "Také! Haru!... Ah! Ko[u]ta is completely done up.
You, Také, bear the marks of the day's encounter. Go to Asakusa
Hanagawado[u]. Cho[u]bei is to be brought here at once. The house must
clear its skirts of this affair. If he refuses to come, put a rope about
his neck and drag him here." The women bowed. At once they prepared for
the street, a mission welcome enough under other conditions. O'Také was
smarting from her wounds and not very willing to be an object lesson.
O'Haru had in mind the fearful curse of O'Iwa, plainly heard by the
women. Very willingly she would have had nothing to do with the affair.

Cho[u]bei was engaged at _go_ with the metal dealer of his
neighbourhood. The fish and wine were in course of preparation in the
kitchen close by and under the skilled hands of O'Taki. The perfume,
vinous and of viands, came to the noses of the competitors, to the
disturbance of their game. Cho[u]bei had just made a profitable stroke.
He had five _ryo[u]_ in hand, commission from the worthy _doguya_ for
the successful sale of a daughter to the Yamadaya of Nakanocho[u]. This
enterprising plebeian, having a son to succeed him in the business, had
secured the necessary furnishing and adoption of a second son into the
rival house of the ward, by means of the fifty _ryo[u]_ secured for the
girl through the experience and clever tactics of Cho[u]bei. Many the
compliments and congratulations exchanged by these excellent men and
worthy representatives of their class as they tussled over their game of
_go_. Profuse were the thanks of the metal dealer for past services and
future feasting. It was with some displeasure therefore that O'Taki had
her offices interrupted to respond to a loud and harsh--"Request to
make!" sounded at the house entrance. Said she crossly--"Who is it?...
Ah! O'Také and O'Haru San of Toémon Sama." Then in wonder--"Oya! Oya!
O'Také San.... Your honoured face.... Has O'Také San gone to bed in the
dark with the cat?" Answered O'Také, in no amiable mood--"It could well
have been. Your man Cho[u]bei deals in such articles. There are the
marks of O'Iwa's nails. As for Cho[u]bei, is the precious rascal at
home?"

O'Taki heard her with rising rage--"O'Iwa? What has Cho[u]bei San to do
with any O'Iwa and the house of Toémon San? Why call the man of Taki a
scoundrel?"--"Because he is such. Nay, Okamisan, don't get
angry."--O'Haru was speaking--"has your husband a brother in
Abegawacho[u], a brother in need of twenty _ryo[u]_ and with a daughter
who would do nothing but run after the men?" O'Taki was puzzled.
"Cho[u]bei San has no brother, in Abegawacho[u] or any other _cho[u]_.
Hence such brother has no daughter O'Iwa; nor are there children of his
own, except the one born to him by this Taki, and a girl already
sold...." A light was breaking in on O'Taki. Months before she had come
home to find that the Ojo[u]san had taken her departure. Explained
Cho[u]bei--"At Yotsuya everything has been adjusted. Iémon Dono is
established again with his wife. The Okusama will not come back to us.
Deign to rejoice at the auspicious settlement of her affairs." Which
O'Taki did; all the more as Cho[u]bei often was in funds in the
successive days through Tamiya. Now she looked from one woman to the
other, her fists clenched and working. Said the harsh voice of
O'Také--"Cho[u]bei lied then; just as the Danna Sama thought. Nearly a
year ago he brought to the house the daughter of his brother Kanémon. He
sold her into life service as a night-hawk. For this she turned out to
be worthless. O'Taki San knows our Okamisan. No matter how severely
beaten, even until the blood came, O'Iwa would not consent to serve.
Other means were tried, but the men of the house would have nothing to
do with her. She was too ugly. Finally she was degraded into being the
kitchen wench, to fetch and carry, and do the hardest and most
nauseating tasks. At this downfall in her prospects like a very fool she
rejoiced. To-day she met the toilet dealer Mobei. He recognized her as
the Lady O'Iwa of Tamiya in the Yotsuya. Drawn apart they spoke
together. Suddenly she was transformed into a demon. Leaping on Mobei
she tore and clutched at him. Ko[u]ta and this Také ran to aid him.
Ko[u]ta lies helpless and with a broken jaw. Truly it might have been
the kick of a horse she received. This Také is--as can be seen. The Lady
O'Iwa disappeared toward Warigesui. A _chu[u]gen_ saw her leap in.
Probably she has killed herself.... And now, O'Taki San, is not your man
Cho[u]bei a scoundrel?"

Said O'Taki--"Rightly spoken; more than right. Wait here." Abruptly she
entered the inner room. To Cho[u]bei--"You ... my fine fellow ... is
this a time for _go_? Up and off with you; to accompany O'Také and
O'Haru from Toémon's in Honjo[u]. A pretty business is in preparation
there." Said the embarrassed and enraged Cho[u]bei--"Wh-what does this
rude entrance of Taki mean? Is not the master of the metal shop present?
Is such language, such abruptness, to be used in his presence?"--"The
Danna of the _doguya_ is certainly present," coolly replied the woman.
"It would be better if he was at home.... Honoured Sir, pray betake
yourself there. This Cho[u]bei has business with Toémon Sama of
Honjo[u], the brothel keeper and chief of the night-hawks, to whom he
has sold for life service as a street harlot the Lady O'Iwa, wife of the
_go-kenin_ Iémon Dono and heir of Tamiya Matazaémon the _do[u]shin_. A
man can be too clever--as this Cho[u]bei, who cheats his wife and all
others. Do you be clever enough to take the hint and depart.... Off with
you!" The _doguya_ had sat in silence. His eyes were popping out of his
head in frightened amaze. Cho[u]bei bounded up in a rage--"You
huzzy--shut up! Would you publish the affairs of this Cho[u]bei to the
world? Many a bridge is to be passed in the course through this world;
and none too sure the footing. Money must be had to live and enjoy life.
The result, not the means, is the important factor in its acquisition.
Such rudeness to a guest! Vile jade, Cho[u]bei will...." O'Také and
O'Haru had to interfere--"Fight it out later, Cho[u]bei San. This
quarrel is no concern of ours. The sooner the master is seen, the better
for Cho[u]bei San. His rage is great, and mounting. You have the
contract? With that face the master; if you can."--"Just so! Just so! As
for this wench--she shall have something to remember this Cho[u]bei
by...." The worthy and trembling metal dealer took this remark as threat
of renewed violence. "For the kind reception and entertainment: thanks.
Jubei calls later." Nimbly he was on his feet. Diving under the _haori_
into which Cho[u]bei was struggling he bounced out the front, leaving
Cho[u]bei on the ground and floundering in the folds of his garments,
from which issued most violent language. For the first time that day
O'Také and O'Haru had something to amuse them. O'Taki refusing, they
assisted Cho[u]bei to his feet and adjusted his robe. Then one on each
side of him they set out for Honjo[u] Yoshidacho[u]. As parting salute
to O'Taki, Cho[u]bei finished his sentence.... "Something to remember on
Cho[u]bei's return." Her laugh in reply was so savage that the women
turned to look at her. In fright they hastened off with their prize.

At Honjo[u] the reception of Cho[u]bei called forth the whole house.
The pimp entered the presence of Toémon with confident and jaunty air.
"He has the contract?" said Toémon to the woman. O'Haru indicated a
sleeve. The _banto[u]_ and one of the _wakashu[u]_ (young men employes)
grasped the arms of Cho[u]bei. The incriminating document was deftly
removed by O'Haru and passed over to Toémon. "Now the fellow can neither
produce it, nor play his tricks with it." He looked it over carefully;
then placed it with his own copy. Cho[u]bei was too outraged and
frightened to do more than squat and gasp as he looked around the circle
of hostile faces. Without cushion he sat on the bare _tatami_, much as
does a criminal at the white sand. Said Toémon severely--"For once
Cho[u]bei has drunk hot water with this Toémon. Does he think to act
thus with impunity. The younger sister of his brother Kanémon, 'a noted
wench for the streets,' was brought here for life service; sold to
Toémon for twenty _ryo[u]_. Toémon does not intend that the price shall
be too high for him. Cho[u]bei cannot lie out of his own contract.
Toémon has it in his hands. Cho[u]bei has the twenty _ryo[u]_. Toémon
loses his money. Well and good: Toémon clears himself from the affair.
The responsibility lies wholly with Cho[u]bei. Let him look to it."
Cho[u]bei seized the moment when lack of breath in his anger halted the
speech of Toémon. He would have lied, but Toémon again broke in.
"Cho[u]bei has no brother. Cho[u]bei has no woman to dispose of on his
own signature. The one he did have, the one he possesses, Toémon knows
where to find. Toémon had a woman O'Iwa in his house. You sold the wife
of a _go-kenin_, Iémon Dono of Yotsuya; a woman who was the heir of
Tamiya Matazaémon the _do[u]shin_. The Lady O'Iwa is traced to the hands
of Cho[u]bei. Settle the matter with those in office--_machibugyo[u]_,
_do[u]shin_, _yakunin_--when the affair comes to light...."--"Easily,"
burst in Cho[u]bei, once more himself. "Honoured chief, matters do not
call for such earnestness. All this is mere froth and fury. It is true
that Cho[u]bei has deceived the chief; but it was at the orders of those
much higher. The lady of Tamiya was an obstacle. The sale was ordered by
Iémon Dono himself; backed by Ito[u] Kwaiba the head of the Yotsuya
ward."--"Cho[u]bei, you lie," said Toémon. The words and advice of
Kakusuké still rang in his ears. "Iémon Dono? Ito[u] Dono? Who else will
Cho[u]bei bring in as his bails? Such a man is not to be trusted. With
this Toémon there is no more dealing. The guild is to be warned by a
circular letter."

At this fearful threat all Cho[u]bei's jauntiness left him. His
livelihood, his existence, were at stake. He prostrated himself before
Toémon, dragging his body over the _tatami_ to the _zen_ (low table) at
which was seated this autocrat of the night-hawks, this receiver of the
refuse and worn-out goods of his greater brothers in the trade. Toémon
harshly repulsed him with his foot. Cho[u]bei in despair turned to
O'Matsu--"Honoured lady the chief is unreasonably angry. There shall be
no loss of money, no harm suffered by the affair. Deign to say a word
for Cho[u]bei."--"Since when has Matsu had aught to do with the affairs
of the house? The women are her concern. She goes not outside her
province." The pimp sought the feet of O'Také--"Condescend to plead for
Cho[u]bei. His fault is venial. When no injury results, pardon follows.
This is to cut off the breath of Cho[u]bei, of wife and child. Deign to
intercede." The street harlot laughed. Her cracked voice was rough--"The
commission of Cho[u]bei San has no attractions. This Také has had enough
to do with the matter. Truly Cho[u]bei is a wicked fellow. Také would
fare badly in such intercourse. Besides his company is too high flown.
Officials! Samurai! Cho[u]bei San seeks and will find promotion in the
world. Lodgings are preparing for Cho[u]bei Sama in public office--on
the Ryo[u]gokubashi; of such he is assured." She drew away from him,
harshly cackling. Thus he crawled from one to the other. It was
"Cho[u]bei Sama," "Cho[u]bei Dono," in derision they would call him
prince--"Cho[u]bei Ko[u]." All stuck out their tongues at him. The young
fellows of the house, several of them, stood round the entrance,
ostensibly occupied, but with one eye on the scene. As Cho[u]bei sought
the _banto[u]'s_ aid, the man raised a long lean leg and gave him a
violent kick in the breast. Strong hands seized him as he rolled over
and over to the edge of the platform, to land in the arms of the
enthusiastic _wakashu[u]_. The next moment, and Cho[u]bei was picking
himself up out of the mud and snow of the street. The lattice of the
house entrance closed noisily.

In his confusion of mind by force of habit Cho[u]bei turned round and
bowed with ceremony toward the place of his unceremonious exit--"The
time is inopportune. Cho[u]bei intrudes. He will call again." The
opening of the wicket gate, the peering, scowling face of the _banto[u]_
recalled the past scene to mind. With all the haste his tottering gait
allowed Cho[u]bei sprang off northward to the Adzumabashi and home. As
he sped, swaying along, his active mind was making calculations.
"Ryo[u]gokubashi, the last home of the outcast beggar--other than the
river which flows beneath it!" He shuddered at the prophecy. "Bah! One
rascal loses; another gains. Toémon loses twenty _ryo[u]_. From Iémon
San ten _ryo[u]_ was the commission. Ito[u] Dono gave five _ryo[u]_ and
asked no questions. The total to Cho[u]bei sums up thirty-five _ryo[u]_.
For a year the affair of O'Iwa has fattened Cho[u]bei; with something
still left." His foot struck a stone in the roadway. He looked up and
around to find himself before the Genkwo[u]ji. About to enter on the
maze of temple grounds and _yashiki_ separating him from the bridge his
gaze fell on the stagnant squalid waters of the canal. It was in the
dirty foulness of this North Warigesui that O'Iwa had disappeared.
Cho[u]bei pulled up short. A dead cur, copper hued, with swollen
germinating sides and grinning teeth, bobbed at him from the green
slime. Cho[u]bei slewed round--"A vile ending; but after all an ending.
Iémon profits; Cho[u]bei gets the scoldings. Ah! If it was not that
Ito[u] Kwaiba is engaged in this affair; Tamiya should pay dearly. There
is a double ration to share with Cho[u]bei--and not to be touched!
Ito[u] Dono is no man to trifle with. There was that affair with Isuké;
and now, as he says, Iémon is a very son to him." A memory seemed to
touch Cho[u]bei. His pace became a crawl. "Why hasten? Cho[u]bei rushes
to the fiend--that demon Taki. Cho[u]bei would rather face O'Iwa than
Taki in a rage." He laughed--"The attenuated hands of a ghost and the
thick fist of Taki, the choice is not uncertain. From the lady mild and
merciful there is nothing to fear. Evidently she has settled matters
once and for all in the Warigesui. But at the tenement--there it is
another affair. This Cho[u]bei will fortify himself against the shock. A
drink; then another, and still more. The scoldings will fall on a
blunted mind wandering in some dreamland. Time will soothe her rage.
To-morrow Cho[u]bei wakes, to find the storm has passed and Taki his
obedient serving wench." Near the Adzumabashi, following his
prescription against domestic enlivenment, he entered a grog shop; to
turn his good coin into wine.

The quarter at Hanagawado[u] in Asakusa was in an uproar. What had
occurred was this--There was an old woman--"Baba" in the native parlance
for Dame Gossip--a seller of the dried seaweed called _nori_ (sloke or
laver), still called Asakusa _nori_, though even at that time gathered
at Shinagawa, Omori, and more distant places. This old trot had
returned, to make her last sales to the excellent metal dealer who lived
opposite her own home in the _nagaya_, in which she lived next door to
the Cho[u]bei, husband and wife. The tongue of the _doguya_ was still in
full swing of the recital, not only of his own experiences, but of the
revelations of O'Taki. He was only too willing for this twenty-first
time to repeat the tale to the _nori_ seller, his good neighbour. The
good wife and wives listened again with open mouths. The Baba was the
most interested of them all. This choice morsel of gossip was to be
gathered at the primal source, from the lips of O'Taki herself. She was
all sympathy in her curiosity--ranging in the two cases of Cho[u]bei and
wife on the one part, and the metal dealer and his insulted household on
the other part. Away she stepped quickly from the assembly of ward
gossips. At the door of Cho[u]bei's quarters she stopped--"Okamisan!
Okamisan!... Strange: is she not at home? Is she so angered that no
answer is given? However, this Baba fears no one.... Nesan! Nesan!" She
passed the room entrance and went into the area. Glancing into the
kitchen--"Oya! Oya! The meal is burnt to a crisp. It has become a soppy,
disgusting mass. Nesan! Nesan! The rain falls, the roof window
(_hikimado_) is open." She put down her empty tubs in order to play the
good neighbour. The first thing was to close the window against the
descending rain. Quickly and deftly she proceeded to wipe the moisture
off the shining vessels, to put everything in order in O'Taki's usually
immaculate kitchen. Women of this class are finicky housekeepers in
their own homes. As the old wife became less engaged she began to hear
strange sounds above. Some one was in conversation--and yet it was a
one-sided queer kind of talk. The voice was threatening and wheedling.
Then she heard a child cry. Surely O'Taki was in the upper room; and
thus neglectful of her lord and household.

The old Baba went to the foot of the ladder and listened. "Nesan!
Nesan!" No answer came, beyond the curious droning monotone above,
varied by an occasional wailing cry of the child. It seemed to be in
pain. Resolute, the sturdy old Baba began to climb the steps. At the top
she halted, to get breath and look into the room. The sight she
witnessed froze the old woman in horror to where she stood. A woman was
in the room. She knelt over the body of the child, which now and again
writhed in the hard and cruel grasp. The queer monotonous voice went
on--"Ah! To think you might grow up like your father. The wicked,
unprincipled man! To sell the Ojo[u]san for a street whore, for her to
spend her life in such vile servitude; she by whose kindness this
household has lived. Many the visits in the past two years paid these
humble rooms by the lady of Tamiya. To all her neighbours O'Taki has
pointed out and bragged of the favour of the Ojo[u]san. The very
clothing now on your wretched puny body came from her hands. While
Cho[u]bei spent his gains in drink and paid women, Taki was nourished by
the rice from Tamiya. When Taki lay in of this tiny body it was the
Ojo[u]san who furnished aid, and saw that child and mother could live.
Alas! That you should grow up to be like this villainous man is not to
be endured.... Ah! An idea! To crunch your throat, to secure revenge and
peace, security against the future." She bent down low over the child.
Suddenly it gave a fearful scream, as does a child fallen into the fire.
The Baba, helpless, could only feebly murmur--"Nesan! Nesan! O'Taki San!
What are you about? Control yourself." She gave a frightened yowl as the
creature began to spread far apart the child's limbs, and with quick
rips of the sharp kitchen knife beside her dissevered and tore the
little limbs from the quivering body. At the cry the woman turned half
around and looked toward her. Jaws dripping red with blood, a broad
white flat face with bulging brow, two tiny piercing dots flashing from
amid the thick swollen eyelids, it was the face of O'Iwa glowering at
her. "Kiya!" The scream resounded far and wide. Incontinently the old
woman tumbled backward down the steep steps, to land below on head and
buttocks.

Some neighbours, people passing, came rushing in. A crowd began to
gather. "Baba! Baba San! What is wrong?" She could not speak; only point
upward and shudder as does one with heavy chills. As they moved toward
the stair a roar went up from the crowd in the street. O'Taki had
appeared at the window, her face smeared with blood and almost
unrecognizable. She waved a limb of the dismembered infant. The crowd
were frozen with horror. As some shouted to those within to hasten the
woman brandished the bloody knife. Thrusting it deep into her throat she
ripped and tore at the handle, spattering the incautious below with the
blood spurting from the wound. Then she fell backward into the room.
When the foremost to interfere rushed in they drew back in fear at what
they saw. The child's head was half knawed from the body; its limbs lay
scattered to this place and that. The body of O'Taki lay where she had
fallen. It was as if the head had been gnawed from the trunk, but the
head itself was missing. Search as they would, it was not to be found.
Meanwhile the news of these happenings spread rapidly. In the next block
it was shouted that the wife of the pimp Cho[u]bei had gone mad and
killed and eaten five children. A block further the number had risen to
twenty-five. At the guardhouse of the Adzumabashi she had killed and
gnawed a hundred adults.

These rumours were mingled with the strange tale of the old woman as to
O'Iwa San. In time there were many who had witnessed the suicide of
O'Taki, who were ready to swear they had seen the fearful lady of
Tamiya. Cho[u]bei first learned of the affair by being dragged from the
grog shop to the guardhouse of the Adzumabashi. Here he was put under
arrest. Distressed and discomforted he stood before the ruin in his
home, under the eyes of his neighbours. These stood loyally by him. As
happens in ward affairs in Nippon the aspect of the affair not
immediately on the surface was slow to reach official ears. Thus it was
as to the Tamiya phase involved. Cho[u]bei had suffered much, and was in
to suffer more. His fellow wardsmen were silent as to all but the actual
facts needed for interpretation. The marvellous only filters out slowly.
But they had their own way of dealing with him. The _kenshi_ (coroner)
made his report. Examinations, fines, bribes, the funeral costs, reduced
Cho[u]bei to his worst garment. With this after some weeks he was
permitted to go free. The house owner had turned him out. The wardsmen
had expelled him. Enough of Kazaguruma Cho[u]bei--for the present.




CHAPTER XVI

NEWS REACHES KWAIBA


Kwaiba was hard at it, practising his favourite arts. His _saké_ cup
stood before him, and from time to time he raised the bottle from the
hot water, testing its temperature with skilled hand. He accompanied the
action with a continual drone of a _gidayu_. Kwaiba by no means confined
the art of _gidayu_ recitation to the heroic tales usually therewith
associated. His present effort was one of the suggestive and obscene
_ukarebushi_, quite as frequent and as well received in the _gidayu_
theme containing them. Kibei listened and applauded, with cynical
amusement at the depravity of the impotent old man. Kwaiba had found an
excellent bottle companion, and renewed his own former days in the
"Quarter," with the fresher experiences retailed by Kibei. Said
Kwaiba--"All has gone well. For half the year Kibei has been the son of
Kwaiba. He has brought luck into the house." Kibei bowed respectfully.
Continued the old man--"Iémon with his whore is fast destroying Tamiya
by riot and drinking. Cho[u]zaémon is a fish in the net. The debt of ten
_ryo[u]_ has doubled into twenty _ryo[u]_, which at any cost he must
repay. Kwaiba will make him cut belly if he don't. And Tamiya! Old
Tamiya; Matazaémon! O'Iwa is paying his debt to Kwaiba by becoming an
outcast, perhaps a beggar somewhere on the highway. If she shows her
face in the ward, seeking 'cash' to keep life in a wretched carcass,
this Kwaiba will send her to the jail, to rot as vagrant. But what did
become of her? Iémon has never spoken." Kibei shrugged his shoulders. "A
close mouthed fellow; too wise to talk of himself. He would but say that
Cho[u]bei took the affair in hand." Kwaiba threw up his hands in horror
and merriment. Said he--"'Tis rumoured the fellow is a pimp. But surely
he could not dispose of O'Iwa in his line. The very demons of the Hell
of lust would refuse all intercourse with her."

Just then Kakusuké presented himself. "Report to make to the Go Inkyo[u]
Sama. Inagaki Dono sends his compliments to Ito[u] Sama. The papers of
transfer are these; by the hand of Kakusuké." As he took the documents,
said Kwaiba in answer to Kibei's inquiring look--"Your honoured parent
has favoured this Kwaiba. The transfer is of farms in Kazusa for others
in Shimosa. Thus all can be brought under one hand. A single _nanushi_
(bailiff) can manage the whole property in the two villages."--"But the
office...," objected Kibei. He had the _samurai_ instinct against the
slightest taint of failure in obligation. "Let Kibei San deign to follow
in the footsteps of Kwaiba. The successor to the _nanushi_ recently
deceased is a child. Kwaiba is in no haste to provide a substitute
pending majority. The right will lapse, and at majority the boy can be
found occupation elsewhere, to no small gain in the revenue. Out of
sight, out of mind. Kwaiba's present manager is unsurpassed; so is the
income he manages to gather." He looked around in some surprise, seeing
that Kakusuké still maintained his position, although dismissed. Then
noting him closely--"What has happened, Kakusuké? Your colour is bad.
Too cordial entertainment by the _chu[u]gen_ of Inagaki Dono? Or has
Kakusuké seen a ghost?"

"Kakusuké has seen O'Iwa San; of Tamiya. Rather would he have seen a
ghost; if indeed it was not a demon he saw." Kwaiba started--"O'Iwa!
Where?"--"It was at the brothel of Toémon, chief of the night-hawks, at
Yoshidacho[u] in Honjo[u]. Mobei the toilet dealer had suffered
direfully at her hands. Meeting her unexpectedly, the fool let out all
he knew of the happenings in the ward. In a rage she flew on him. 'To
seven lives a curse on Iémon Dono, on Akiyama Sama, on Kondo[u]
Sama.'"--He hesitated; then added--"on the Go Inkyo[u] Sama. Then in a
straight line she flew off toward the canal. Did she drown herself? This
Kakusuké could not ascertain. Going to the aid of Mobei, mauled and
prostrate on the ground, the whole story was learned. Cho[u]bei had sold
her for life to Toémon, to serve as a night-hawk."

Ito[u] Kwaiba sat straight up. His idle braggart words of a few moments
before came home to him. In Kibei he found no encouragement. After all
Kibei was a _samurai_; harsh, but with the courage of his caste and
profession. He spoke openly--"It was an outrageous deed. To sell a
_samurai_ woman to such a life! It stinks. This comes of bringing in a
low dog (_yaro[u]_) such as this Cho[u]bei. Did Iémon know of his
intention?" He looked Kwaiba in the eye, but the latter met him
squarely--"What Iémon knew or did not know, this Kwaiba knows not. But
of this event he must know--and at once. Kakusuké, go in all haste to
the house of Tamiya Sama. Kwaiba would consult with him." Kibei
fidgetted and fumed. He walked up and down the room. Then
abruptly--"Condescend to pardon the presence of Kibei. The honoured
father having matters to discuss with the diviner--he finds no amusement
in the counsellor." As he was withdrawing Iémon entered. Their greeting
was cold to the extreme. Iémon knew that Kibei hated and despised him;
as much as he, Iémon, hated and feared Kibei. Kwaiba called sharply to
his genial son--"Pray be within call, if needed." He was glad to see the
surly fellow's exit. In some things Kwaiba felt fear. The stiff courage
of Kibei made him ashamed openly to air his weakness. He broke the news
at once to Iémon. "Kakusuké has seen O'Iwa." Iémon looked at him
curiously. Was Kwaiba frightened? Said the one-time priest--"What of
that? She lives in Edo. A meeting with her is quite likely; at least for
a man of the grade of Kakusuké." He smiled grimly--"But...," said
Kwaiba. He plunged into the story of the _chu[u]gen_ in its full
details. Iémon listened carefully. "Ah! She is likely to come
here."--"Come here!" bellowed Kwaiba. "Just so," answered Iémon. "If she
seeks vengeance on this Iémon, on Kwaiba, or the others, where else
would she come than Yotsuya. We cannot run away." Kwaiba gasped at his
coolness--"And Iémon Dono, does he open Tamiya to the presence of its
ex-lady and mistress?"--"A beggar, an outcast, importuning Tamiya; the
severed body will lie in the ditch, for the gatherers of offal to cast
as food to the dogs on the moor. Fear enters, but--honoured chief,
condescend to follow the example of Iémon."

The round eyes in the round face of Kwaiba stood out. He leaned over
and touched Iémon's sleeve. In astonishment Iémon noted the fright
depicted in his face. The blustering old man at bottom was an arrant
coward. Two knaves should understand each other--as did he and
Cho[u]bei. He felt that he had been gulled during the whole of his
intercourse with this old fool. He should have bluffed; and not been
bluffed. Said Kwaiba in lowered voice--"Kakusuké could see nothing of
her. She disappeared into the waters of Warigesui. Suppose O'Iwa appears
as a ghost, to take vengeance on Kwaiba...." He straightened up in
astonishment and some anger at the derisive smile playing over the face
of Iémon. Indeed Iémon was more than amused. Not at the circumstances,
but at finding at last this weak spot in the man who had dominated him.
Conditions, however, controlled him. It was fact that the physical O'Iwa
might appear--to the distress and discomfiture of all concerned. They
must stand together. He spoke with severity--"Rich and afraid of ghosts!
Has not Ito[u] Dono two spearmen when he goes abroad? When he has an
interview with his lord does he tremble with fear? When the enemy in
life, with all physical powers, is not feared; why fear a disembodied
spirit deprived of all means of venting its wrath and spite? It is but
the imagination which works havoc. None are more helpless than the dead.
With them time and occasion has reached an end. If O'Iwa returns to
Yotsuya, it will be in her own person. With O'Iwa, the beggar and
night-hawk, our _Kumi-gashira_ knows how to deal."--"Then Iémon knew the
lot dealt out to O'Iwa."--"At first hand; from Cho[u]bei himself. The
lean knave has prospered by the affair. Iémon had no such desire to see
him, as to secure his costly presence at the dinner so unfortunately
witnessed by Mobei.... But deign to call for wine; drive out these
vapours with wine. Honoured chief, condescend to play the host to
Iémon." Iémon's manner was not wholly natural, as Kwaiba could have
detected if more himself. He felt immensely relieved. A priest--surely
he was one to know all about the nature of ghosts; was one to speak with
authority. Iémon was hardly to be regarded as in ecclesiastical good
odour. But Kwaiba was easily satisfied. He, too, roared--"Wine! Wine!
Bring wine!" As by magic Kibei appeared at the welcome sound. He
disliked Iémon, but he liked wine. The servants bustled around. The wine
was heated--again and again. A feast of fish--with more wine--followed.
It was late when Iémon left the house, the only sober member of the
party. Of his hosts, one was maudlin, the other asleep. The ample
resources of Tamiya, if not of benefit to his person, in these past two
years had given him the chance to harden his head; and he had grasped
it.

Iémon by no means had all the confidence he displayed before Kwaiba. He
was a priest, but environment influences everybody. There was a
possibility--discountenanced by experience, but existing. As he walked
slowly along Teramachi his thoughts strayed back into the past. "It was
an ill bond between this Iémon and O'Iwa San. Without question she has
drowned herself in the Warigesui. The body must be found and buried.
Memorial services are to be recited, for one dying without relatives or
friends (_segaki_)." The virtuous resolution was the outcome of his
meditation and glances into the many graveyards passed in his progress
through the temple-lined street. It was a beautiful street, with its
overhanging trees, its open spaces populated by the many dead, its
temples gorgeous in red and gilding amid the dark green of pine and
cedar. Iémon on this night had to hasten his steps. Rain threatened.
Gusts of wind came sharply from this side and that, driving the first
drops of the coming storm. He reached home just as it broke with all its
fury.

To O'Hana he would say nothing of Kwaiba's mission. On her remarking on
the lateness of the hour, he made answer that the old man was out of
sorts. Kibei was too robust a bottle companion for a man reaching toward
his seventieth year. No matter how vigorous, Kwaiba's wine was showing
on him. The two prepared for bed. O'Hana listened as the rain dashed in
streams against the _amado_, as if trying to break its way in. She gave
a little chuckle--"Who would have thought it!"--"What?" asked Iémon,
perhaps a little tartly. He was nervous. O'Hana laughed--"That Iémon and
this Hana should be where they now are. Their parting was on a night
like this. Ah! At seeing a man weep Hana could have retired into a
cave--forever. Only the fortunate accident of a drunken _yakunin_
(constable) as guest enabled her to give warning.... And now! Once more
united Iémon and this Hana live in luxury. Every wish is gratified.
Thanks for the past which contained this meeting in its womb; thanks for
the present in which happiness is secured:

    'Losing one's way, again roads meet!
     The hill of flowers.'"[27]

A terrific gust struck the rain-doors. They bent and cracked before
the force of the gale. The vivid white of lightning showed that one door
had been forced from its groove. Iémon rose and replaced it. As he
turned away suddenly the room was plunged in darkness. Said the voice of
O'Hana--"The light of the _andon_ has gone out. Oya! Oya! The lights in
the Butsudan (altar) are lit. And yet this Hana extinguished them."
Grumbled Iémon--"The wind has blown out the light in the _andon_.
Doubtless a spark was left in the wick of the altar light. Fire is to be
dreaded; great care should be taken in extinguishing the light." As he
relit the light in the night lamp, O'Hana went up to the Butsudan to
extinguish the lights there. She put her hand out to take one. A sharp
scream, and she fell back in confusion and fright. "An _aodaisho[u]_ in
the Butsudan! Help! Aid this Hana!" As she fled the snake with a thud
fell on the _tatami_. Unrolling its six feet of length, it started in
pursuit. Iémon stepped behind it and caught it by the tail. A sharp rap
behind the head stunned it. It hung limp in his hand. "Hana, please open
the _amado_."--"No, no: this Hana cannot; move she will not."--"Coward!"
said Iémon. "Time comes when Hana, for generations in the future
existence, will wander hill and dale in such form."--"Ara!" The woman
was properly shocked at this speech, wicked and brutal as an
imprecation. "Has the life of Hana been so foul as to deserve such
punishment in a future life? Surely 'tis not the priest of Reigan who
speaks; nor Iémon." She could only see his lips move as he stood at the
_amado_. "Evil was the connection between O'Iwa and this Iémon. Wander
not as one unburied, but becoming a Buddha at once enter Nirvana. Namu
Myo[u]ho[u] Renge Kyo[u]! Namu Myo[u]ho[u] Renge Kyo[u]! Wonderful the
Law, wondrous the Scripture of the Lotus!" With the invocation he cast
the stunned reptile far out into the garden. Returning, he said--"The
_aodaisho[u]_ is the most harmless of snakes. The farmers keep it to
destroy the rats which infest house and store rooms. How can Hana be
afraid of snakes, living in this _yashiki_ overgrown by weeds and grass,
from roof to garden?" O'Hana did not reply in direct terms--"It is evil
fortune to take a snake in the hand."--"Never mind such talk. It is the
priest who speaks. This Iémon knows all about snakes. Go to sleep." She
obeyed, knowing nothing about O'Iwa and the events of the day; yet her
slumber was broken and restless. By morning she was in a high fever.[28]




CHAPTER XVII

NEWS FROM KWAIBA


Kwaiba was reported as ill; very ill. His friends and dependents who had
to pay visits of condolence, spoke of this illness with awe and terror.
To understand what follows something must be said of the past of this
man. The actor, drawing on the presumed knowledge of his audience as to
the story in the gross, can pass this over with a speech or two; a
horror-struck gesture and allusion. Not so the _ko[u]dan_ writer, who
perforce must lay before his reader all the _minutiæ_ of the case.

Ito[u] Kwaiba did not brag when he spoke of his beauty as a boy, his
handsome figure as a young man. These had brought him wealth and
position; gained, it was whispered, in vilest service to his lord. In
these days he had in his employ a _chu[u]gen_ named Isuké, or as some
say Kohei. Engaged before the mirror Kwaiba was applying the paint and
powder which of late had become necessary adjuncts to fit him to appear
before his lord. A gesture of pain and discomfiture, and then Kwaiba
turned irritably toward his satellite. "Isuké, you are a clever fellow.
Kwaiba has needed no aids to his looks--up to recent days. Now paint and
powder, all the armoury of a woman, or paraphernalia of an actor, hardly
avail to conceal the blotches which disfigure Kwaiba's face and body.
The voice broken and husky, the lightning pains in limbs and joints,
these violet patches--in such state it soon will be impossible to act as
attendant on his lordship's household service, as _kami-yakunin_. What
disorder eats into the life and happiness of Kwaiba?"

For a time Isuké made no answer, beyond a bow at his master's
acknowledgment of his cleverness, and in which he heartily concurred. He
seemed engaged in a close contemplation of the end of his nose. "Hei!
Hei!" It was all that Kwaiba could get out of him for the moment. Then
noting the growing anger Isuké began with--"Condescend beforehand to
pardon this Isuké. Though the anger of the Wakadono (young lord) is hard
to bear, yet a faithful servitor should speak. Deign to step this way."
He conducted Kwaiba to one of those small retired rooms, opening on an
inner garden and common to every properly built house of any size in
Nippon. He closed the few rain-doors, shutting out the light. Then
fetching a piece of camphor, he set fire to it. When the thick yellow
light flared strongly he took up a hand-mirror and passed it to Kwaiba.
Kwaiba was frightened at what he saw. His face was dark as that of a
peasant of Satsuma. Said Isuké--"The darkness is shown up by the light
of the burning camphor. The colour is due to the poison circulating
between the body and the outer skin. The white sunlight does not show up
this symptom. But there is another test." Lighting a candle, he took a
long steel _kanzashi_ needle and heated it to redness. Holding the cold
end by his head towel he grasped the arm of Kwaiba. The latter drew
back, afraid. "Nay, it will give no pain," said Isuké. He thrust the hot
length of the needle several inches under the skin. As far as Kwaiba was
concerned he might as well have thrust it into the straw matting
(_tatami_) at his feet. Isuké withdrew the needle and carefully pressed
the arm. A brownish liquor oozed out; not blood. "The Danna has a
nose--as yet." Kwaiba hastily applied his arm to that member. He turned
his face to one side in disgust and horror--"Is this Kwaiba already dead
and rotten? In such condition all is lost. Duty no longer can be
performed. Service and income cease together. Isuké, there remains
naught but to get out the mats. Kwaiba will cut belly."

Isuké examined him carefully and quizzically. Satisfied with his
inspection, he said--"Deign to have confidence in Isuké. In former days
he was not Isuké the _chu[u]gen_. Son of a doctor of the Dutch practice
at Nagasaki; gambling, wine, women have reduced Isuké to the state of a
servant. Family and friends long since have discarded and cast him out.
The severance of relations between parent and child was formal. Isuké
owes naught of service or duty to any but his master Kwaiba. Here is his
refuge. Deign to give Isuké three silver _ryo[u]_. The disease is
curable. Trust the matter to Isuké. _Soppin_ (mercury) duly applied will
remove the poison, and with it all the disastrous symptoms. The two
hundred and thirty _tawara_ of income are enjoyed by the Wakadono.
Service can be performed; and Isuké preserves such a good master."
Flattered and frightened Kwaiba at once handed over the money. Isuké
disappeared to secure the drug necessary to the "Dutch practice." Baths
and potions, potions and baths, followed in due course. The promises of
Isuké were fulfilled. The fearful symptoms gradually were alleviated. In
the course of six months Kwaiba was himself again; his position was
assured to him. He heaved double sighs--of relief from the nightmare
which had pursued him; of anxiety at the nightmare substituted for it.

Kwaiba was a rake and a gambler. So was Isuké. The two hundred and
thirty _tawara_ of income was saved to Kwaiba--and Isuké. Not long after
the cure was thus assured Isuké disappeared. Kwaiba sighed gently, with
relief at the departure of one who knew too much of his affairs, and
with a scared feeling on losing the only "doctor" in whom he had
confidence. "These fellows come and go, like leaves on a tree. Isuké has
grown tired, and deserted. Some day he may return. This Kwaiba is a good
master." Isuké did return--in the form of a note from the Yoshiwara.
Twenty _ryo[u]_ were needed to pay his debts to pleasure and gambling.
Severely reprimanded, Isuké opened his eyes in astonishment.
"Respectfully heard and understood: has the income been reduced? But
that does not affect the share of Isuké. He keeps well within his
limit." This was the first intimation Kwaiba had of Isuké's views as to
his rôle of physician. In those days the doctor usually had the pleasure
of performance, not of payment. Moreover with the great--like
Kwaiba--performance was carried out at a distance; the pulse felt by the
vibration of a string attached to the wrist, or at best by passing the
hand under the coverlet. For a time Kwaiba's strange medical attendant
devoted himself to his more prosaic duties of _chu[u]gen_. Within ten
days his master ransomed him from a resort in Shinagawa; price, ten
_ryo[u]_. A few weeks later he was heard from at a gambler's resort in
Shinjuku. The note was peremptory--and for fifty _ryo[u]_. Kwaiba lost
all patience. Moreover, just then he held office very favourable for
bringing this matter to an issue. But he must have Isuké; and have him
in Yotsuya. As usual payment secured the presence of a repentant Isuké,
full of promises of amendment. Kwaiba smiled, used soft words; and
shortly after Isuké was confined to the jail on a trumped up charge of
theft from another _chu[u]gen_. Kwaiba, then acting as magistrate for
the district, had full power. On notification he assured Isuké of a
speedy release. This the unhappy man secured through a poisoned meal,
following a long fast. He died raving, and cursing his master. No one
heard him but his two jailers, who considered him crazy--this man of bad
record.

Years had passed, but Isuké merely lay dormant in the mind of Kwaiba.
Then came up the affair of Tamiya--the threatening curse of O'Iwa San.
Iémon's counsel lasted but over night. With soberness and morning Kwaiba
straightway showed the results of wrecked nerves and distorted
imagination. Sleepless nights he now visited on his friends by an
increasing irritability. The first few days of this state of Kwaiba were
laughable. He spoke of O'Iwa San; not freely, rather with reticence. He
made his references as of jesting expectation of her advent. Then he
passed to boisterous tricks; springing out on the maids from dark
corners or the turns in the corridors. Alarmed by these manifestations
of the old man--not entirely strange, for he was a terror to the female
element in his household--they soon noted that there was an unnatural
wildness in his amusement at their discomfiture. Now he would talk of
nothing but O'Iwa. From this hysterical mirth he passed to an hysterical
fear. Afraid of visions of the Lady of Tamiya he stayed awake at night.
To be alone appalled him. He would have others keep awake with him. He
was now at the gibbering stage. "Night in the house of Kwaiba is to be
turned into day. The day shall be the time for sleep. Lights! Lights!
More lights!" He sat surrounded by his household, until the white light
of dawn filtered through the spaces above the rain-doors. One of his
women, her hair down for washing, met him unexpectedly in the corridor.
With a howl of terror he started to flee. Then recognizing her, he flew
on her and beat her almost to a jelly in his insane rage. People began
to talk of the eccentricities of Ito[u] Kwaiba--the honoured ward head.

Barely three weeks after Iémon's visit a violent scene occurred in the
mansion of the _Kumi-gashira_. Shouts and screams, the smashing of
screens and sounds of a terrific struggle were heard in Kwaiba's room.
Kibei, who with the men preferred night for sleep, rushed in. He found
the old man standing, stark naked and alone. His attendants had fled--to
a woman. His pillow sword drawn, Kwaiba was dancing to this side and
that. "Isuké! O'Iwa! Pardon! This Kwaiba is a wicked fellow! Isuké was
poisoned by Kwaiba. O'Iwa San? Kwaiba sold her for a street whore. For
seven lives they pursue him. Ah! A merry chase! But Kwaiba deals not
with night-hawks. His game is higher. Away with the huzzy!" He had
grasped in both hands the flower vase standing in the alcove
(_tokonoma_). Kibei dodged, and catching him by a wrestler's hold, threw
him to the ground. Kakusuké, just entering, was knocked flat by the
heavy missile. Groaning, he rose, and with other servants came to the
aid of the Wakadono. Kwaiba was overpowered and guarded during the
remainder of the night.

With daylight he knew nothing of what had occurred; at least he made
no reference to it, no response to the talk of others. His fear was now
full on him. He babbled of nothing but Isuké and O'Iwa San. Now he was
incapacitated, downright ill. There was no more turning of day into
night, and _vice versa_. He was in the hands of his nurses. But to
humour him Kibei marshalled the women. Their beds were made encircling
that of Kwaiba in the midst. Kibei and Kakusuké were present. Thus they
lay in this room brilliant with its scores of lanterns, its wax lights
blazing on the lamp-stands. At the sides and in each corner were placed
the scrolls of the holy _sutra_. Kwaiba in despair sought a sleep which
would not favour him. "Some one walks in the corridor.... Namu Amida
Butsu! Namu Amida Butsu!... Kibei! Kibei!" The appeal to the man would
bring quicker response than that to the Buddha. Indeed there was a
sound, as of hair rubbing across the paper screens, of some one or
something trying to peer through the opaque material. There was a rattle
and dash of rain. A gust swept through the corridor, the _sho[u]ji_
slightly parted. Kwaiba gave a shriek--"O'Iwa! O'Iwa San! Ah! The
bloated face, the drooping eyelid, the corpse taint in the air. It
catches Kwaiba's throat. O'Iwa the O'Baké would force away Kwaiba the
living. Ha! Ha!" A stronger gust, and the _sho[u]ji_ dislodged from its
groove whirled round and fell noisily into the room. Terror gave
strength to the sick man. Kwaiba sprang madly forward. It was horrible
to see the ghastly renovation of this tottering, flabby, emaciated man,
who yet inspired the fear of a maniac's reckless strength. The
frightened women huddled and crouched in the now darkened room, lit but
by a single _andon_ near the alcove. Was Kwaiba mad? As the men fought
over the ruins of the _sho[u]ji_, in the darkness of the corridor, at
first faint as a mist, then distinctly seen, the women were assured of
the presence of O'Iwa. In long black robe, face wide and bloated, of a
livid greenish tint, hair in wild disorder, bulging forehead, swollen
eyeless lids, she stood over the struggling men. Suddenly she thrust the
severed head she carried into the face of Kwaiba, leering horribly at
him the while. With a yell he fell flat on his back. The braver entered
with lights. All gathered round the unconscious Kwaiba.

This scene was the crisis of his disorder. The disease, once dormant,
now fell on him suddenly and with full force. Perhaps these mental
symptoms were its first indication. More annoying to his comfort, ulcers
broke out all over his body. The itching drove the man nearly frantic.
His mad scratching spread the sores. The boils developed. They ran with
pus. So terrible was the stench that few would stay by him. The women
fled the room in terror, driven away by the running stream of physical
corruption, the continual babble of lewdness from the corrupt mind. He
soon noted their absence. Kibei, attended by the sturdy and faithful
Kakusuké, remained to nurse him. Suddenly said Kwaiba--"O'Hana, the
harlot of Reigan; this Kwaiba would have talk and dalliance with her.
Summon her hither. Let wine and the _samisen_ be brought, a feast
prepared. O'Hana! O'Hana!" He raved so for the woman that Kibei thought
her presence would quiet him. A request was sent to the house of Iémon.
Wishing her to know nothing of the affair of O'Iwa, Iémon had kept
silence. He would have refused the mission--on the pretext of a quarrel
with Kwaiba and Kibei. O'Hana showed herself unexpectedly obstinate--"It
is to the favour of Kwaiba Sama that Iémon owes this Hana. She has a
duty to the past, as well as to the present." With a snarl she turned on
him, glowering. Iémon shrank back. He passed his hand across the eyes
into which O'Iwa had just looked. He no longer opposed her going.

O'Hana was still weak from repeated attacks of the fever which had
visited her ever since the night Iémon had cast forth the _aodaisho[u]_.
She said that the snake had bitten her. It was the poison, not fever,
working in her. Iémon had laughed at her proposal to try the exorcisms
of the priest. Behind the irritation aroused by his scepticism was that
peculiar clinging of a woman to an old lover, to a man with whom she had
been intimate. In the heart of O'Hana there still remained a strong
leaning to the man who had removed her from the rapid and nauseating
life of the Fukagawa brothel, which cast her into the arms of anyone who
paid the price and raised his finger. With time and the old conditions
probably she would have been as unfaithful to Iémon as she had been to
Kwaiba. The latter showing his desire, she would have answered his call.
Even before this disease-eaten swollen mass of dropsy, she showed but
temporary repugnance. Leaning over him, almost overcome by the stench,
with endearing terms she strove to rouse him to consciousness and
recognition of her. It seemed fearful to have him die without the word
of parting. Kibei aided her by raising the old man. The result was a
horrible frightened stare in eyes made large by fever and delirium. Long
he gazed at her. Said the woman--"'Tis Hana; Hana once the intimate of
Kwaiba. Deign to take courage. This is but a passing affliction. With
Hana as nurse recovery to health is assured." She laid her hands on his
shoulders. In so doing her hair, come loose, fell down around her wan
face. Kwaiba was as galvanized. With a howl the old man pushed her
violently away. "Scrawny wench! What impudence to show your face here!
Ah! To the last moment, waking and in dreams, she pursues this Kwaiba. I
sold you. 'Tis true--I sold you for a night-hawk--to Toémon of Honjo[u].
Does Kwaiba consort with wenches of such ilk?" Raising his fist he dealt
her blow after blow, all the time shouting--"O'Iwa! O'Iwa! The O'Baké
solicits Kwaiba. Broken loose from Hell and the waters of Warigesui she
would force away Kwaiba. Help! Help! Aid for Kwaiba! Away with the
O'Baké!" The old man again had broken into his mad fit. The shouts of
Kibei brought Kakusuké. Kwaiba's hands were detached from the masses of
O'Hana's hair. The wounds on her face were not so deep as those
inflicted on her mind. At last the secret was out. In bare feet she fled
along the muddy street toward the Samoncho[u] house.

It was true that the vileness of the disease, the vileness of Kwaiba's
tongue, had driven the women from attendance in the sick room to the
remotest quarters of the house. But there was a deterrent even to their
now limited service. All said the place where Kwaiba lay was haunted.
Under press of necessity a maid had brought needed medicaments to the
sick man's room. Putting down the light she carried on the _ro[u]ka_,
she pushed open the _sho[u]ji_ to enter the outer chamber. Her robe
caught as she did so.

Turning to release it she gave a fearful shriek. Standing in the
corridor, at the open screen behind her, were two tall figures robed in
black. With dishevelled hair, broad white flat faces, bulging brows,
eyelids swollen and sightless, yet they gazed through and through the
onlooker and into the farther room. One creature, even more hideous with
drooping lid and baldness extending far back, half moved, half fell
toward the frightened maid. The woman's screams now were mingled with
wild laughter. Kibei came rushing out, sword drawn, to find her in a fit
of mad hysterics. Catching the drift of her broken phrases he went out
on the _ro[u]ka_. There was no one there. _Haori_ and _kimono_, hung up
there to dry, rustled and moved a little in the draft. Had these
frightened the woman? Kakusuké carried her back to her companions.
Henceforth no one would enter that part of the building occupied by the
sick man. Kibei as son, Kakusuké the old and faithful attendant, were
isolated in their nursing.

Kibei noted the sick man's face. "Father, why the forehead so wrinkled?
Is pain condescended?" Said Kwaiba--"'Tis the rats; they gnaw and worry
at Kwaiba."--"Rats?" replied Kibei in some astonishment. He looked
around. The _sho[u]ji_ were tight closed. Kwaiba noted the inspection.
He shook his head, and pointed to the _rama-sho[u]ji_, the ornamental
open work near the ceiling. This could not be obviated. "Auntie (Obasan)
is old and deaf. She sleeps; while rats, attracted by the foul sores of
the scrofulous child, enter and attack the infant in its cradle. The
child gets thinner and weaker every day; then dies. A terrible creature
is the rat." So much for the opinion of Nippon. Kibei had brought a
mosquito net. Its edges were weighted down with heavy stones. Thus the
watchers could not be taken by surprise. Under its protection the sick
man was saved from annoyance.

Said Kibei--"This illness is most tedious. Could not Kibei go to the
Yoshiwara for a space? The letters of the Kashiku (_oiran_) accumulate.
Kibei has nothing to give, and has given no explanation for not giving.
What thinks Kakusuké?" Kakusuké was brave. Moreover he knew the Wakadono
was brave. The prospect, however, of facing his old master in a crazy
fit--and perhaps O'Iwa--had no attraction. He gave his advice--"The Go
Inkyo[u] Sama is in a very precarious state. He is now very weak. The
worst may happen at any moment. For the Wakadono to be taking his
pleasure at the Yoshiwara would arouse criticism in the ward; nay, even
more than criticism. It would be held unfilial. Deign to reconsider the
purpose." Kibei looked sourly at the swollen corruption which
represented Kwaiba--"How does he hold on! His strength must be great."
Kakusuké shrugged his shoulders--"The Go Inkyo[u] Sama will not die
easily. He has much to go through yet."--"In the name of all the _kami_
and Buddhas, how has he come to such an end? He is a sight to inspire
fear--in those who can feel such." Replied Kakusuké with sly look--"The
Go Inkyo[u] Sama has lived high, and loved beyond measure. The Wakadono
does well to reconsider his purpose."

The night was passing. The two men, worn out by the continued watching
and nursing, after vain struggle to keep awake had gone to sleep.
Kakusuké was in the room with Kwaiba. In his slumber Kibei was back in
the fencing room. The clash of the wooden swords (_bokken_), the cries
of the contestants, rang clear in his ears. He woke to find rain and
storm shaking and tearing at the _amado_. But it was the shouts of
Kakusuké, standing at the _sho[u]ji_, which had aroused him--"Danna
Sama! Danna Sama! Wakadono! At once! At once! Deign to hasten!" Kibei
rushed into the next room. In fright Kakusuké pointed to the mosquito
net. A figure stood upright within it, swaying, gesticulating,
struggling. It was a figure all black and horrible. "Un! Un!" grunted
Kwaiba. He was answered by a mincing, gnawing sound. "Father! Have
courage! Kibei is here." He rushed at the heavy stones, to toss them to
one side and enter the net. The swaying figure within suddenly toppled
over in a heap. With his sword Kibei tore and severed the cording of the
net. The black mass of rats scattered to the eight directions of space.
On approaching Kwaiba a terrible sight met the eye. Eyes, ears, nose,
chin, toes and fingers had been torn and eaten off. The lips were gnawed
away and exposed to view the grinning teeth. A feeble groan--and Kwaiba
had met his end. Neither Kibei nor Kakusuké dared to touch the foul
body. In their panic the two men looked in each other's faces. "Namu
Amida Butsu! Holy the Lord Buddha, Amida!" prayed Kibei, on his knees
before the corpse. "Namu Amida Butsu!" answered Kakusuké.[29]




CHAPTER XVIII

IN THE SHADOW OF THE GO-INKYO[U]


Said a neighbour next day, on meeting his fellow-gossip--"Ah! Is it
Goémon San? It is said the Go Inkyo[u] is to be congratulated." Kamimura
Goémon sniffed. He was a long man; with long face, long nose, long thin
arms, long thin legs; a malicious man, who longed to give advice to his
fellows which they much disliked to hear, and liked to see them writhe
under the infliction. In fact this epitome of length rarely spoke in
good faith or temper--"The Go Inkyo[u] is to be congratulated? Escaping
the troubles of this world, perhaps he has fallen into worse troubles in
the next." At this unorthodox reply Mizoguchi Hambei showed surprise.
Continued Goémon--"The Go Inkyo[u] died a leper, eaten by the rats. Such
an end hardly calls for congratulations." Mizoguchi gasped, with round
eyes and round face. "Extraordinary!"--"Not at all," replied Kamimura,
complacently tapping the palm of one hand with the elongated fingers of
the other. "The Go Inkyo[u] drove out O'Iwa San from Tamiya. He gave
O'Hana in her stead to Iémon as wife. Hana the harlot! Cursed by O'Iwa
in dying, he has met this frightful end. Akiyama, Natsumé, Imaizumi will
surely follow. As will all those involved in the affair."--"But is O'Iwa
San really the cause of the death? The Go Inkyo[u] in life was not the
most careful of men in conserving health." This was timidly interjected
by a third party. Kamimura suppressed him with a scowl--"Of course it is
O'Iwa San. Has she not been seen? The women of the house answer for it.
Only Kibei the sceptic, and Kakusuké who would face the devil in person,
attempt to deny it." He threw up a hand. With unction--"Ah! It inspires
fear. Small is the profit of wickedness and malice. He is a fool who
indulges in either.... How cold it is for the time of year!"

Said the interloper--"But the congratulations have to be rendered all
the same. It will be necessary to attend the all-night watch. How
vexatious! Perhaps O'Iwa San will not appear. There is no getting out of
it?"--"Certainly not," answered Kamimura. "The Go Inkyo[u] was the head
of the ward association. Twelve neighbours have been invited to the
watch. At dawn the body is to be prepared. A pleasant undertaking, if
all that is said be true! The viands will be of the best, the wine no
worse and plentiful. None must fail to attend." He smacked his lips. The
others likewise, but much less heartily.

It was an unwilling band which crawled in laggard procession through
rain and mud and the length of the Teramachi to Kwaiba's house. A
_do[u]shin_, the ward chief, a rich man, the mansion displayed all its
splendour. The atmosphere, however, was oppressive. Kibei greeted the
guests with heartiness, and accepted their condolence and gifts with
lavish thanks and the cheerful face of him that profiteth by the
funeral. Kakusuké was his main aid in connection with the Go Inkyo[u]'s
last appearance. Occasionally a timid white-faced woman was seen, but
she would flit away from the scene of these festivities, to seek the
companionship of her panic-stricken fellows. Entering the funereal
chamber the body was found, laid out and decently swathed so as to
cover, as far as possible, the horrible nature of the death. On a white
wood stand was the _ihai_ in white wood, a virtuous lie as to the
qualities of the deceased. It ran--Tentoku Gishin Jisho[u] Daishi. Which
can be interpreted--"A man of brilliant virtues, virtuous heart, and
benevolent temperament." Screens, upside down, were placed at the head:

"Alas! The screen: the carp descends the fall."[30] Akiyama, Natsumé,
Imaizumi, were the last to appear. The former had been composing a
violent quarrel between his two friends--the long and the fat. Much
recrimination had passed, and the usually peaceful Imaizumi was in a
most violent and truculent humour. He glared with hate on Natsumé, who
now aided Akiyama in efforts to soothe his anger. On entering the
assembly the looks of all were composed. "A retribution for deeds in the
past world. Old; but so vigorous! The offering is a mere trifle. This
Kyuzo[u] would burn a stick of incense." Kibei extended his thanks and
suppressed his smile as much as possible. He was breathing with full
lungs for the first time in weeks. The storm was over; happiness was
ahead; the clouded sky was all serene. "Thanks are felt. This Kibei is
most fortunate: nay, grateful. Such kindness is not to be forgotten
during life."--"The Inkyo[u] an _hotoké_; Iémon Dono and O'Hana are the
husband and wife not present?" The question came from some one in the
room. "O'Hana San is very ill. Her state is serious. Iémon does not
leave her." Akiyama answered for the truant pair. Kibei's joy was
complete.

Akiyama, Natsumé, Imaizumi were standing by Kwaiba's body. Kamimura
slowly approached. The long man's face was longer than ever; longer,
much longer than that of Natsumé; and Kibei was not in the running.
Goémon meditatively fondled his nose; on the pretence of concentrating
thought, and for the purpose of relieving that member from the savour
arising from Kwaiba's bier. This was no bed of roses--"Yes, the Inkyo[u]
is indeed dead." He sniffed. "Soon it will be the turn of all of you--to
be like this;" another sniff--"of Iémon and O'Hana, of Natsumé and
Imaizumi, of this Akiyama San." The latter gave a violent start. With
hand to his nose also, he turned on the intruder. Continued Goémon--"A
plot was concocted against O'Iwa San. Beggared and driven from the ward,
deceived and sold as a street harlot, this death of the Inkyo[u] is but
the first in the roll of her vengeance. Kamimura speaks with pure heart
and without malice. You men are not long for this world. Is Akiyama San
reconciled? And...." He pointed a skinny finger at Kyuzo[u], then at
Jinzaémon. "You show it. Your eyes are hollow; your nostrils are fallen
in. The colour of the face is livid. You seem already to be _hotoké_,
prepared to lie with the Go Inkyo[u]." Akiyama found his tongue. He
burst out in a rage--"The jest is unseemly. Kamimura San goes too far.
It is true this Cho[u]zaémon gave counsel to Ito[u] Kwaiba. Kyuzo[u] and
Jinzaémon took some part in what followed. But we acted on the orders of
Ito[u] Dono, of Iémon San. On the first will be visited any grudge."
Goémon laughed harshly. He pointed to the corpse. "Here he lies. How did
he die? Goémon does not jest, and the argument of Akiyama San is rotten.
The master bids the servants to beat the snow from the bushes. The snow
falls on them; not on him. How now Akiyama San?" Cho[u]zaémon turned
away discomfited. All three felt very bad--in mind and body.

The bell of Sainenji struck the eighth hour (1 A.M.). Just opposite, its
clangour filled the whole mansion with a ghostly sound. In the depths of
night this inert mass of metal seemed a thing of life, casting its
influence into the lives of those present, rousing them to face grave
issues. Noting the absence of Natsumé, the round-faced, round-eyed,
round-bodied Imaizumi followed after. Kibei came forth from the supper
room, to find his guests all flown. "Where have they gone to, Kakusuké?"
He looked around in amazement--"They were taken with pains in the belly.
With this excuse they departed. Yotsuya is afflicted with a flux." The
_chu[u]gen_ answered in the dry and certain tone of one unconvinced.
Kibei shrugged his shoulders. "There is naught wrong with wine or
viands?"--"Nor with the guests," replied Kakusuké. "They are cowards,
who have caught some inkling as to the not over-nice death of the Go
Inkyo[u]."--"The latter day _bushi_ are not what the _bushi_ were of
old; at least this brand of them. Ah! These wretched little bureaucrats;
_bushi_ of the pen. Two men to eat a supper prepared for twelve sturdy
trenchers. Well: two are enough to wash the corpse. Lend a hand
Kakusuké."--"Respectfully heard and obeyed," replied the _chu[u]gen_.

The white dress for the last cover to the body was laid ready. Secured
by Kwaiba many years before in a pilgrimage to the holy Ko[u]yasan, the
sacred characters were woven into its tissue. Kakusuké dragged a large
tub into the bathroom. Kwaiba's body was unswathed and placed in it.
Kakusuké eyed his late master with critical and unfavourable eye.
"Naruhodo! The Go Inkyo[u] is a strange object. No eyes: nose, ears,
lips gone; his expression is not a pleasant one.... Nay! The Wakadono is
awkward. Throw the water from head to feet.... Take care! Don't throw it
over Kakusuké. He at least is yet alive. The Wakadono is wasteful. More
is needed. Deign to wait a moment. Kakusuké draws it from the well." He
opened the side door and went outside. Kibei drew a little apart from
the body. It stank. A noise at the sliding window (_hikimado_) in the
roof made him look up. Oya! Oya! The face of O'Iwa filled the
aperture--round, white, flat; with puffed eyelids and a sightless glare.
With a cry of horror and surprise Kibei sprang to the door. As he did so
slender attenuated hands groped downward. "Kakusuké! Kakusuké!"--"What
is it, Wakadono?"--"O'Iwa: she looks down through the _hikimado_! She
seeks the Inkyo[u]!" Kakusuké gave a look upward--"Bah! It's the cat. Is
the Wakadono, too, getting nerves? They are a poor investment."--"The
cat!" Kibei sighed with relief. Nevertheless he kept his hand on his
sword.

He turned round--to give a shout of surprise--"Kakusuké! Kakusuké! The
body of the Go Inkyo[u] is no longer here." As the astonished
_chu[u]gen_ came running to look into the empty tub, both men nearly
fell over in their wonder. The body of the Inkyo[u] was whirling around
the neighbouring room in execution of a mad dance. Followed by Kakusuké,
his worthy son and heir sprang in pursuit. Invisible hands led Kwaiba
and the pursuers into the darkness of the garden, into the rain and
storm. Kibei heard the steps just in front of him. He pursued madly
after them. "To lose his parent's body--this was against all rules of
Bushido[u]." Thus comments the scribe of Nippon. Kibei could commit all
the moral and physical atrocities except--failure in filial conduct to
parent and lord; the unpardonable sins of the Scripture of Bushido[u].
Kakusuké soon lost his master in the darkness. Disconcerted and anxious
he returned to secure a lantern. The wind promptly blew it out; then
another, and a third. He stood on the _ro[u]ka_ in the darkness to wait
the return of the Wakadono. For the first time Kakusuké had noted
failing purpose in his young master. He was more solicitous over this
than over the strange disappearance of the Inkyo[u]'s body. Was the
Wakadono losing his nerve; as had the O'Dono?

In time Kibei reappeared. To Kakusuké's inquiring glance--"Kibei
pursued to Myo[u]gyo[u]ji; then up the hill. Here sight was lost of the
Inkyo[u]. The darkness prevented further search. A lantern is next to
worthless in this gale. Kakusuké, go to the houses of Natsumé and
Imaizumi close by. They are young and will aid Kibei in the search."
Kakusuké did not demur. Pulling his cape over his head, off he posted.
He asked but to come across the Inkyo[u]'s body, in O'Iwa's company or
not made no difference to this iron-hearted servitor. His mission was
fruitless. The two men had expressed the intention of spending the night
at the Kwaiba wake. Neither had as yet returned. Grumbled Kibei--"The
filthy fellows! With this excuse to their wives they seek new pastures
at Nakacho[u] (Shinjuku), to spend the night in dissipation. 'Tis
Natsumé who is the lecher. Gladly would he wean Imaizumi from his barely
wed wife."--"Or wean the wife from Imaizumi Sama! Wakadono, nothing can
be done now. The dawn should be awaited." With these sage comments the
_chu[u]gen_ squatted at respectful distance from his master. From time
to time one or other arose, to look sceptically into the empty tub in
which once had reposed the Inkyo[u]'s body. Finally both nodded off into
sleep. At dawn--don, don, don, don, came a loud knocking on the outer
gate. Kakusuké went out, to return with astonished face and portentous
news. The dead bodies of Natsumé Kyuzo[u] and Imaizumi Jinzaémon had
been found at the foot of the _baké-icho[u]_, a huge tree close by the
guardhouse. Finger tip to finger tip three men could not girdle this
tree. With the bodies of the men lay that of a woman. Two corpses, man
and woman, were stark naked. Kibei's presence, as the successor to
Kwaiba's office, was required.

He prepared at once to start for the Okido[u]. The tale was in time
learned from the prolix Kamimura Goémon, who had witnessed part at least
of the scene. As he was knocking at his door on the Shinjuku road,
having just returned late from the watch at Kwaiba's house, rapid steps
were heard in the street. A man, recognized as Kyuzo[u], passed, running
at top speed. He dragged along by the hand a woman, the wife of
Imaizumi. The two were nearly naked. Close in the rear pursued Imaizumi
Jinzaémon, his drawn sword in his hand. They sped up the wide road.
Goémon stepped out, to follow at a distance this flight and pursuit. At
the _icho[u]_ tree the fugitives were overtaken. The woman was the first
to be cut down. Kyuzo[u] turned to grapple with the assailant. Unarmed
his fate soon overtook him. He fell severed from shoulder to pap. Having
finished his victims Imaizumi seated himself at the foot of the tree,
and cut open his belly. "Long had such outcome been expected," intoned
the long-nosed man. The case needed no explanation. Others echoed the
opinion of Goémon, who was merely many fathoms deeper in the scandal of
the neighbourhood than most of them. It was agreed to hush the matter
up. Reporting his own experience, to the astonishment of his hearers,
Kibei, accompanied by Kakusuké, started down Teramachi toward
Samégabashi. As they passed the Gwansho[u]ji attention was drawn by a
pack of dogs, fighting and quarrelling in the temple cemetery. A white
object lay in the midst. With a shout the men sprang in. Tearing up a
grave stick Kibei rushed into the pack, driving off the animals. There
lay the body of Ito[u] Kwaiba, brought hither by the hands of O'Iwa to
be torn and mangled by the teeth of the brutes. Thus was it that the
funerals of Ito[u] Kwaiba, Natsumé Kyuzo[u], and Imaizumi Jinzaémon took
place in one cortége on the same day and at the same time. The
postponement in the first instance--was it providential?




CHAPTER XIX

TAMIYA YOÉMON: WITH NEWS OF KONDO[U] ROKURO[U]BEI AND MYO[U]ZEN THE
PRIEST


Tamiya Yoémon was stumbling home in all haste from the funeral of Ito[u]
Kwaiba. He was full of news for the wife, O'Kamé. The neighbours could
talk of nothing but the strange happenings in the ward, and details lost
nothing in the telling; perhaps gained somewhat by the process. Most
edifying was the reported conduct of the wife of the late Natsumé
Kyuzo[u], the observed of all observers at the funeral, the object of
that solicitous congratulation which embodies the secret sigh of relief
of friends, neighbours, and relatives at the removal of a prospective
burden. Natsumé had left behind him a wife, an old mother, an infant
child, and huge liabilities. To administer this legacy--and perhaps to
get rid of her mother-in-law--the wife had promptly and tearfully
sacrificed her status, and sold herself for a term of years to the
master of the Sagamiya, a pleasure house at Shinagawa post town. The sum
paid--one hundred _ryo[u]_--relieved the immediate future. The
neighbours derided the ignorance of the Sagamiya in accepting the
uncertain bail of Akiyama Cho[u]zaémon. If the lady behaved badly, small
satisfaction was to be obtained of her security. "Ignorance is bliss."
Let the Sagamiya bask in both and the beauty of the prize. Meanwhile
their concern and admiration were for the lady destined to this post
town of the crowded To[u]kaido[u], the stopping place of high and low,
noble and riff-raff, entering Edo town. Of the inmates of the pleasure
quarters, the harlots of Shinagawa, Shinjuku, Itabashi, were held in
lowest esteem.

Arrived at his door Yoémon stopped short in surprise and alarm. To his
loud call of "Wife! Wife!" answer there was none. Looking within he
could barely distinguish objects through the thick smoke which filled
the house. The last thing the Nipponese would do under such conditions,
would be to throw open doors and panels. This would convert the place at
once to a blazing conflagration. Where was the fire getting its start?
Choking and spluttering Yoémon groped his way through the rooms into the
rear. Wherever the fire was, it was not in the living rooms. The smoke
was accentuated on reaching the kitchen. Here was a smell of burning
rice, of Yoémon's dinner gradually carbonizing under the influence of an
element other than the juices of his round stomach. Looking into the
room, through the thickened haze he saw the flame of the fire
brightening. O'Kamé the wife could be made out, on her knees before the
portable furnace. She was blowing a mass of slivers and brushwood into
flame by the aid of a bamboo pipe. It was this stuff, green and partly
wet, which gave out the choking acrid smoke. Yoémon was angered beyond
measure at the sight of his ruined meal and expectations. "Kamé! Kamé!
What are you doing? Have you gone mad? Ma! Ma! The dinner is being
ruined. You are ill. Kamé's head whirls with head-ache. Yoémon will act
as cook. Go to bed--at once." At his peremptory speech the wife looked
up into the face of the husband standing over her. She scowled at him in
a way to cause fear. "Not a _sho[u]_ of rice; not a _mon_. Yoémon would
give freely to a beggar, rather than confer a 'cash' on Iwa. Yoémon
sells me as a street harlot." He started back in fright before the
snarling distorted visage. The wife sprang to her feet. Pash! On his
devoted head descended the hot iron pan with its content of stew. "Ah!
Kamé is mad--clean daft." With a wild laugh she seized the pot full of
boiling rice and began to pour it into the drain. When he tried to stop
her, he received the mess full in his bosom--"Mad? Not at all. This Kamé
never felt in better spirits. When grass grows in Samoncho[u] we enter
Nirvana. Ha! Ha! Ha! To hasten the happy time!" With a kick she knocked
over the furnace. In an instant the _tatami_ was in a blaze. Yelling
like mad, shouting for help, Yoémon leaped from the house. O'Kamé seized
the burning brands in her bare hands, hurling them into this room and
into that. Outstripping the old Yoémon, the younger men of the
neighbours rushed in. The mad woman was soon overcome and carried from
the burning building. Nothing else was saved. They took her to the house
of Akiyama Cho[u]zaémon. Here she was tied hand and foot, and put in a
closet. The old man Yoémon stood by in despair, watching the progress of
events. Before the conflagration was extinguished his own and four other
houses were destroyed. He was a ruined man; responsible for all.

Myo[u]zen the priest had just set foot on the slope leading up from
Samégabashi to Yotsuya. A somewhat long retreat at Myo[u]honji,
attendance at the ceremonies held on the Saint's (Nichiren) birthday,
had kept him in ignorance of recent events in Yotsuya. In the dawn of
the beautiful day of earliest 3rd month (our April 13th) he had set out
from Kamakura. Sturdy as were the priest's limbs, yet he was a little
tired. He rested at the foot of the hill. Then his eyes grew big with
astonishment. In the waning afternoon a funeral came wending its way
downwards. But such a funeral! Two spearmen led the way. Then came a
long train of attendants. Three catafalques followed, the first a most
imposing bier. Then came the relatives. Kibei on horseback headed these.
The women rode in _kago_. That it was a ward funeral Myo[u]zen had no
doubt, both from its source and make up. He noted a parishioner in the
cortége. "Kamimura Uji!" The long-limbed, long-faced, long-tongued man
left the ranks and obsequiously greeted his spiritual father. At
Myo[u]zen's question he expressed gratified surprise, and unlimbered his
lingual member at once--"Whose honoured funeral this? Nay! It is a
triple funeral; that of Natsumé Kyuzo[u], Imaizumi Jinzaémon, the Go
Inkyo[u], our ward-head. It is owing to this latter that there is such
an outpouring of the ward, with attendance of barrier guards and
firemen. Although the ending of Natsumé and Jinzaémon was not edifying,
that of our honoured once head gratified still more the public
curiosity. Gnawed and eaten by the rats he died most horribly." He told
of the eventful night. "Hence delay in the burial. The deaths of Natsumé
and Imaizumi were almost coincident. The body of the adulterous woman,
rejected by both families, was cast out on the moor." He noted with
satisfaction the great impression his tale made on the priest, as also
the clerical garb and rosary held in hand. "Pray join the band. A little
re-adjustment...." He bent down. With the baton he held in hand as
leader of his section he carefully dusted the robes. Adjusting the folds
he pronounced the results as most presentable. "The honoured Osho[u] is
ready to bury or be buried." Myo[u]zen took this remark in very ill
form. He prepared to answer tartly, but curiosity overcame his weariness
and ill temper. The procession was moving fast. He fell at once into
line, with hardly an acknowledgment of Kamimura's courtesy, as this
latter hastened forward to his place.

His neighbour in the procession explained. The nature of the deaths of
the three men had aroused the feeling in the ward. Their connection with
a conspiracy against O'Iwa San was now generally known. Without doubt it
was owing to her vengeance that they had died as they did. Let them lie
outside the quarter. The protest to Kibei was respectful but emphatic. A
newcomer, he had made no great resistance. It was determined to bury
them at the Denzu-In, close by the mound of the nameless dead of Edo's
great fire of more than half a century before. Hence the direction of
the cortége. As the cemetery of the great temple was approached the
curiosity of Myo[u]zen, morbidly growing the while, became overpowering.
The priest slipped from rank to rank. At the grave he stood in the very
front. As long-time friend he besought a last glance at the dead. Those
given to Natsumé and Imaizumi called forth a careless prayer for each.
The men hesitated before raising the cover concealing the body of
Kwaiba. At Myo[u]zen's peremptory gesture they complied. He bent over
and looked in. Frozen with horror, he was fascinated by those great
holes for eyes, large as teacups, which seemed to fix him. Dead of
leprosy, gnawed and torn by beasts, the face presented a sight
unforgettable. The holes torn in the flesh twisted the features into a
lifelike, though ghastly, sardonic grin, full of the pains of the hell
in which Kwaiba had suffered and now suffered. A stench arose from the
box which made the hardened bearers hold their noses and draw away. Yet
the priest bent down all the closer. In his corruption the lips of the
old man seemed to move. Did Kwaiba speak? Closer and closer: Myo[u]zen
seemed never satisfied with this inspection. The poise and brain gave
way. Priest and corpse met in the horrible salutation. With exclamation
the attendants sprang forward. Myo[u]zen in a dead faint was carried
apart and laid on the ground. Some priests of the hall busied themselves
over him. Somewhat revived he was taken off to the residence quarters of
the temple, and soon was able to return to his home. "Curious fool."
Kibei was greatly angered. He was easily irritated in these days. The
delay in the rites almost maddened him. Would old Kwaiba--his father
Ito[u] Inkyo[u]--never be got out of men's sight? Out of Kibei's sight?

That night Myo[u]zen sat alone in his quarters. Somewhat shaken, he was
ashamed and regretful at thought of his unseemly curiosity of the
afternoon. The priests of Denzuin had regarded him with covert amusement
and repulsion. He had noted one passing the sleeve of his robe over his
lips. Myo[u]zen explained the incident by more than usual weariness.
They condoled with him, and made horrified gestures of ill-disguised
glee when they thought his attention was elsewhere. In his present
privacy the scene at the grave came back to mind again and again. "Ah!
Ah! If this Myo[u]zen had not looked. The Inkyo[u]'s face was terrible.
Myo[u]zen cannot put it from mind." He glanced at the pages of the sutra
lying before him. He turned them over. He knew they spoke of the
horribleness of death; but what was the cold script to the actuality? It
was no use, the attempt to read. Kwaiba's face interposed. "Oh! That
salute! The very idea of that terrible salute, the contact with
corruption!" He was as if plunged in an icy bath. He started nervously.
It was but rain dashing against the _amado_, rattling and twisting in
the gale. He could not sleep. That night he would watch. The fire was
hot in the _hibachi_ (brazier). He went to the closet to get some tea.
On opening it he sprang back with a shout of alarm, to lean trembling
and quivering in every limb huddled against the wall. "Namu Myo[u]ho[u]
Renge Kyo[u]! Namu Myo[u]ho[u] Renge Kyo[u]!" One character of the
wondrous formula secured pardon and safety to the believer in that
paradise of Amida which Myo[u]zen was in no great haste to visit.
Shivering as with a chill intently he watched the animal as it glided
along the edge of the room, to disappear into the shadows. He shrugged
his shoulders wearily. A rat had frightened him almost out of his wits!
His heart beat tumultuously, almost to suffocation; then it seemed to
cease altogether; to resume its wild career.

Hardly was he again seated, his hand on the kettle--don--don, don--don,
don, don, don. Some one was violently knocking on the door. Myo[u]zen
sprang up. Approaching the _amado_ with silent step he eyed the bolts:
"All secure." Snatching up a stake close by he jammed it in between
floor and crosspiece. Leaning heavily on the panel he listened.
"Myo[u]zen Sama! Osho[u] Sama! Condescend to open; deign to give
entrance! The storm nearly throws one to the ground. News! News for the
Osho[u]! A request to make!" Myo[u]zen held his ground against this
outer temptation. "Who are you, out at this hour of the night and in
such weather? To-night Myo[u]zen does not open. Go away; return in
daylight."--"But the honoured Osho[u] Sama is needed. His presence is
requested. Deign to open; at least to hear the message. The priest aids
the afflicted." There was something in the voice he recognized, despite
its terror. Regaining some courage he parleyed. The priest was for the
consolation of the unfortunate. O'Iwa had been, was unfortunate. He
could not open. "Who are you? Unless the name be given this Myo[u]zen
holds no further talk. To-night he is unwell, positively ill. Come at
dawn and Myo[u]zen will receive you."--"Who? Does not the voice answer
for the person? This is Tomobei, from the house of Kondo[u]
Rokuro[u]bei. Deign to open. The master needs and calls for the aid of
the Osho[u] Sama."

Voice and speech, the importance of Kondo[u] in the life of Myo[u]zen,
broke down his hesitation. Slowly he removed the bars. Tomobei entered,
dripping with wet. He cast down his straw coat at the entrance. The
man's eyes and manner were wild. He kept casting frightened looks into
the wild welter of storm outside. When the priest would withdraw into
the room he held him by the skirt. "What has happened?" commanded
Myo[u]zen briefly. Replied Tomobei--"A terrible thing! To-day the master
was ready to attend the funeral of Ito[u] Inkyo[u]. The wife was engaged
in putting the house _kimono_ in the closet. O'Tama was playing on the
upper _ro[u]ka_. She is but seven years old. Leaning far over to see her
father leave, she lost her balance. Down she fell, to be impaled on the
knife-like points of the _shinobi-gaeshi_. The sharp-pointed bamboo,
protection against thieves, have robbed the Danna of his greatest
treasure (_tama_). Deep into throat and chest ran the cruel spikes, to
appear through the back. The sight inspired fear, so horrible was it. He
could but call out--'Tomobei! Tomobei!' All effort to detach the child,
to saw off the points, did but make matters worse. It was necessary to
fetch a ladder. When taken down she was dead. Alas! Alas! The Okusama is
nearly crazed. The Danna Sama in his cruel distress does but rage
through the house. 'Myo[u]zen Osho[u], he loved the child. Let Myo[u]zen
Osho[u] be summoned to say a prayer of direction, while yet the child
spirit hovers hereabouts.' Such is the cry of the Okusama. Hence the
presence of this Tomobei. Otherwise he would rather be scourged at the
white sand than face the darkness in which O'Iwa San wanders abroad."
Man and priest were weeping. The former in his fright and over the
confusion and distress fallen on the household; the priest over the
sudden and dreadful end of this child to whom the homeless one, the man
devoted to the solitary life, had taken an unbounded affection as of a
father. Great as was his terror, he forgot his own ills in the greater
misfortune of the life-long friend. He remained bowed in prayer. "Namu
Myo[u]ho[u] Renge Kyo[u]! Namu Myo[u]ho[u] Renge Kyo[u]! Oh! The
wondrous law, the _sutra_ of the Lotus!" He rose--"Myo[u]zen comes."

As they struggled through the storm, Tomobei kept up a nonsensical,
running talk, full of the superstitious fear of the man of the lower
classes. "Iya! The affair has been terrible, but misfortune is in the
air.... What's that! Ah! Something passes by ... above. O'Iwa! O'Iwa!"
He seized the priest's arm and clung to him in terror. Myo[u]zen's fears
had all returned. He would have run away, but was too tightly held.
"Where! Where!" He shrieked and whirled around toward Samégabashi.
Tomobei held on tenaciously to his skirts. An object was bearing down on
them in the dark. Close upon priest and man they jumped to one side. A
cold hand was laid on the neck of the cleric, who squawked with fear. A
howl answered the howls and mad cries and blows of the two men, who now
threw themselves flat on the ground to shut out sight of the apparition.
The beast sped down the hill. Discomfited, Myo[u]zen disentangled
himself from the embraces of a broken water spout, which descending from
the roof under which he had taken shelter, was sending its cold stream
down his neck. Tomobei rose from the mud puddle in which he lay face
downward. They gazed at each other. "A dog! A wandering cur!" Myo[u]zen
eyed his once immaculate garments with disgust. How present himself in
such a state! Tomobei read his thoughts and determined to keep a
companion so hardly won. "There are present but the master and the
Okusama, Tomobei, and Kiku; other company there is none.... Yes; the
Ojo[u]san."--"The corpse needs no company," said Myo[u]zen testily. In
his disgrace and unkempt condition Myo[u]zen was unduly irritated at his
child friend. The business was to be gone through. They were opposite
the cemetery of Sainenji, on its western side. Said Tomobei--"A paling
is loose. There is no need to descend the hill. This is no cheerful spot
at this hour. Deign to sprint it, Osho[u] Sama. In the time one can
count ten the entrance at the rear is reached. Deign a spurt, honoured
priest; deign to sprint." Myo[u]zen felt he was in for everything this
night. With Tomobei he tucked up his robes to his hams, as if entering a
race. Crawling through the bamboo palings into the haunt of the dead, at
it they went--a mad spurt across to Ko[u]ndo's house. Tomobei was the
more active. He turned to watch the priest tripping over hillocks in the
grass, knocking into gravestones hidden by the darkness. So near home,
courage was returning. He burst into laughter at sight of Myo[u]zen
madly hammering a battered old stone lantern of the _yukimido[u]ro_
style. The broad-brimmed hat-like object he belaboured as something
naturally or unnaturally possessed of life, all the while giving
utterance to anything but priestly language. Tomobei ventured back to
his rescue. Myo[u]zen was quite battered and bleeding as the two rushed
into Kondo[u]'s house.

The master was expecting them; but he threw up his hands as they
appeared in the room. "Osho[u] Sama! Tomobei! What are you about! Why
rush into the room, clogs still on the feet? Deign to withdraw. The
_tatami_ are stained and streaked with mud.... Water for the feet of the
Osho[u] Sama! Tomobei, are you mad? Out with you: bring water to clean
up this mess." In confusion the priest withdrew. His apologies were
profuse as he reappeared--"Alas! Terrible the loss, and in such dreadful
manner. Kondo[u] Dono, Okusama, part at least of this grief Myo[u]zen
would take on himself. Great is the sorrow at this end of one just
beginning life." The wife received the condolence of the priest with a
burst of weeping. Then she turned fiercely on the husband--"It is all
the fault of Rokuro[u]bei. He was _nako[u]do_ for O'Iwa San in the
marriage with Iémon. Turning against her, he took O'Hana into the house.
Did she not spend her time in idling, and teaching the child the ways of
her questionable life--'how to please men,' forsooth?... Ah! Tama did
have pretty ways. Though but of seven years, she danced, and sang, and
postured as would a girl double her age. Now thus cruelly she has
perished." Her mind, reverted to the child, again took a turn. "The plot
against O'Iwa--with Ito[u] Kwaiba, Iémon, Cho[u]zaémon--here is found
the source of this calamity. O'Iwa in dying has cursed all involved. Now
'tis the turn of Kondo[u] and his unfortunate wife." She ended in
another outburst of tears, her head on the mats at the feet of the
priest. Rokuro[u]bei was tearing up and down the room, gesticulating and
almost shouting--"Yes! 'Tis she! 'Tis she! The hateful O'Iwa strikes the
father through the child. Ah! It was a cowardly act to visit such a
frightful ending on one budding into life. O'Iwa seeks revenge. O'Iwa is
abroad; and yet this Kondo[u] cannot meet with her." Myo[u]zen was
almost deafened with his cries and noisy earnestness. Truly to bring
peace into this household, with division reigning between husband and
wife smitten with fear of the supernatural, would be no easy matter. His
priestly experience taught him the safest way to bring about his object.

"'Tis true; 'tis true. But loud cries avail nothing. The aid of the
Buddha for the deceased is to be sought." Apologetically he showed
something of his condition to the wife. At once she rose. Outergarments
were removed. Muddied undergarments were renewed. Myo[u]zen went into
the mortuary chamber. The little "Jewel" was laid out as in sleep. The
wounded chest, the torn throat, were concealed by garments and a
scarf-like bandage adjusted by a mother's sad and tender care. The
incense sticks lay in clay saucers near the couch. "Oh, the wonderful
Law! The _sutra_ of the Lotus! Namu Myo[u]ho[u] Renge Kyo[u]! Namu
Myo[u]ho[u] Renge Kyo[u]!" He looked long at the little silent figure.
His eyes were full of tears as he turned and took the hands of the
weeping mother who had followed him into the room. Then for long he
spoke in consoling tones. She was somewhat quieted when they returned.

Kondo[u] Rokuo[u]bei was still moving restlessly about the room. Now he
was here, now there; from the death room he returned to the company;
from them he passed to the kitchen. The wife thought of the friend and
priest. "Tomobei, go to the store-room and bring wine." Myo[u]zen was a
curious mixture. His weak spot was touched--"Deign it, honoured lady,
for all. Let the occasion be made seemly, but more cheerful. Cause not
sorrow to the dead by an unmeasured grief. This does but pain the Spirit
in its forced communion with the living. Death perchance is not the
misfortune of subsequent existence in this world, but a passage to the
paradise of Amida." He spoke unctuously; as one full informed and
longing for its trial. His homily had no effect in moving Tomobei, who
was flatly unwilling to perform the service ordered. "The wine...,"
broke in Kondo[u] harshly.--"The go-down is at the end of the lot. The
hour is very late, and the storm ... and other things ... it rages
fiercely. This Tomobei...."--"Shut up!" roared his master, with easily
roused anger. The maid O'Kiku timidly interposed--"There is a supply in
the kitchen. This Kiku early brought it there, anticipating the need.
Indeed the storm is terrible. One gets wet to the bone in traversing the
yard." The wife caught the last words--"Aye! Wet and chilled the lost
child spirit wanders, ringing its bell and vainly seeking aid and
shelter; no aid at hand but that of the heartless hag in the River of
Souls."[31] At the thought of the little O'Tama in cold and storm she
broke down. Crying bitterly, she crept from the room and laid down
beside the bier.

The wine was served. Myo[u]zen drank. Then he drank again. His
potations gave him confidence--for more drink--and recalled him to his
functions. "Let us all pray. Namu Myo[u]ho[u] Renge Kyo[u]! Namu
Myo[u]ho[u] Renge Kyo[u]! Wonderful the Law! Wonderful the _sutra_ of
the Lotus, explanatory of the Law by which mankind are saved, to enter
the paradise of Amida. Be sure the wanderings of O'Tama will be short.
Scanty is the power of the Shozuka no Baba. Soon shall the child sit
upon a lotus. Early shall be her entrance into Nirvana. Namu Myo[u]ho[u]
Renge Kyo[u]! Namu Myo[u]ho[u] Renge Kyo[u]!... Honoured master, let all
join in. Command the servants to join in the recital of the Daimoku."
Kondo[u] waved a hand at Tomobei and O'Kiku, in assent and command.
Vigorous were the tones of all in the responses. Myo[u]zen drank again.
He pressed the wine on the others; drinking in turn as they agreed. The
night was passing. It was the eighth hour (1-3 A.M.). Said he--"Don't
get drowsy. By every means avoid it. Now! A vigorous prayer." He raised
his hand--"Namu Myo[u]ho[u] Renge Kyo[u]! Namu Myo[u]ho[u] Renge
Kyo[u]!" But the responses were flagging. Said Myo[u]zen--"This will
never do; at this hour of the night." He drank again--to find that the
supply had come to an end. Kondo[u] was nodding. Tomobei, if awake, was
deaf to words. Myo[u]zen rose himself to fetch a new supply.

Kondo[u] pricked up his ears. The temple bells were booming the hour
watch in solemn unison. The rain splashed and pattered on the _amado_. A
rustling, swishing sound was heard, close by, in the next room. Now it
was as if a hand was passing along the screen. He sprang up, drawn sword
in hand. His eyes were riveted on the _sho[u]ji_, anticipating an
appearance. Then he laid a violent hand on the interposing obstacle and
threw it back. A tall figure robed in black, with broad flat face and
bulging brow, puffed eyelids in which were sunken little dots in place
of eyes, hair in wild disorder framing the dead white face, stood before
him. "O'Iwa! O'Iwa!" The lamp was knocked over, but not before he dealt
the one fierce upward blow. Madly he sprang on the apparition and
slashed away in the dark. "Kiya!" The cry rang loud. Kondo[u] danced
with joy, calling loudly for lights. "O'Iwa! O'Iwa! Kondo[u] has slain
the O'Baké, the enemy of his child! Rejoice with Kondo[u]! The vendetta
is accomplished!" In the darkness and confusion a groan was heard; then
another, still fainter; then there was silence. Tomobei appeared with a
light. He leaned over the long black robed body; to raise an alarmed
face to his joyful master. "At what does the Danna Sama rejoice? What
has he done? 'Tis Myo[u]zen Sama, the Osho[u] Sama, who lies cut down.
Dreadful has been the mistake of the Danna Sama. This is like to cost
the House dear."--"Namu Myo[u]ho[u] Renge Kyo[u]! Namu Myo[u]ho[u] Renge
Kyo[u]!" The sword had slipped from Kondo[u]'s hand, and in genuine
grief he knelt beside the body of the unfortunate priest, seeking for
some sign of life. Alas! Myo[u]zen had almost been cut in two by the
upward sweep of the sword. From liver to pap was one gaping wound. He
lay in the pool of almost all the blood in his body. Gathered around the
corpse the four people eyed each other with terror.

Don--don--don, don, don, don. They sprang up in a huddled mass. The
sound was at their very shoulders. "Some one knocks at the back door,"
said Tomobei. "Go open it," commanded Kondo[u]. Tomobei flatly refused,
and without respect, nay with insolence. Kondo[u] picked up and weighed
in his hand the bloody sword. Why mingle vile blood with good? Instead
of cutting the man down he went himself and opened the half door at the
top. A woman, dripping with water, her hair in wild disorder, her face
white as chalk, stood outside in the storm. Kondo[u] gave an exclamation
of surprise--"O'Kamé of Tamiya! How comes O'Kamé here? It was said that
Yoémon San had shut her up, as one gone mad." The woman smirked with
satisfied air--"Kondo[u] Rokuro[u]bei is seer as well as murderer. This
Kamé was bound and imprisoned; nay, almost divorced. Myo[u]zen, just
dead at Kondo[u]'s hands, to-morrow was to pronounce the divorce. For so
much, thanks to Kondo[u] Dono. But O'Tama has died. Kamé would condole
with Kondo[u] San; burn a stick of incense for O'Tama. Condescend to
grant entrance." Said Rokuro[u]bei abruptly--"How knows O'Kamé of the
death of Myo[u]zen; who told her of the fate of O'Tama?" She laughed
wildly--"Who? O'Iwa; O'Iwa is the friend of Kamé. It was she who loosed
the bonds. 'O'Tama of Kondo[u]'s house is dead. O'Kamé should condole
with the wife, the friend of this Iwa. Get you hence, for Kondo[u] has
murdered the priest.' ... So here we are; O'Iwa accompanies Kamé. Here
she is." She waved a hand into the storm and darkness. "Deign to give
passage to the chamber where lies O'Tama. O'Iwa and Kamé would burn
incense to the darling's memory, to the little Jewel." With a roar
Kondo[u] seized the breast of her robe--"Vile old trot, off with you!"
He gave her a violent push which sent her on her buttocks. The woman
remained seated in the mud, laughing noisily. She held out two skinny
arms to him. With a slam he shut the door.

He knelt by the priest's body, truly grieved--"Ah! O'Iwa is abroad. How
has this mad woman knowledge of this deed? What was the offence of
Myo[u]zen thus to deserve the hatred of Tamiya O'Iwa?" O'Kamé had seen
the priest enter, had stood in the wet listening to the wild talk of
Kondo[u], had seen the bloody sword in his hand. Her mad brain had put
riot and death together. The talk as to O'Tama she had overheard from
her closet. Kondo[u] thought of neither explanation. He was at odds with
Akiyama, and had sent no message to his house. As he speculated and
thought how best to compound matters with the temple, now grieved at the
rash blow fallen on a friend, now aghast at the certain and heavy
indemnification which would be exacted by the enraged clerics, an uproar
arose outside. There were wild cries and a scream of pain. Then came a
loud triumphant shout--"Heads out! Heads out! O'Iwa is slain! This
Akiyama has killed the O'Baké. The incubus of the ward is lifted. Help!"
Kondo[u] sprang up and out of the house. Were the words true? Had
another succeeded where he had failed? His lantern, the lanterns of many
others, threw light on the place where Akiyama Cho[u]zaémon bravely
stood ward over the prostrate body of the apparition. Returning late
from Shitamachi he had entered the ward with shrinking terror. As he
skulked along, with eyes on every dark corner, the figure of a woman was
seen close by the eaves of the house of Kondo[u] Rokuro[u]bei. As he
approached she came forward laughing wildly the while. The light of his
lantern fell on the ghastly white face, the disordered hair. In a spasm
of fright he dropped the lantern and delivered his blow in drawing the
sword. The cut was almost identical with the one delivered to Myo[u]zen
the priest. The men there gathered looked into each other's faces, then
at the body of O'Kamé lying in their midst. The crowd parted, and Tamiya
Yoémon appeared. Kondo[u] Rokuro[u]bei and Akiyama Cho[u]zaémon stood by
with bloody swords, their own skins without a scratch. They were
self-accused.

The upshot of the affair was ruin for all. Matters in Yotsuya were
coming to the official ears. Yoémon was forced to make charges against
Akiyama; the more willingly as therein lay a chance to recoup his own
losses through the wife he intended to divorce on the morrow. Kondo[u]
easily cleared his skirts of this offence, but was involved with the
irate temple priests. All were entangled in the heavy costs of the law
of those days. Of these three men something is to be said later.




CHAPTER XX

KIBEI DONO


Kibei was in great straits, financial and domestic. The death of Kwaiba
had brought him anything but freedom. In Nippon the headship of a House
is much more than the simple heirship of our western law. Relieved of
his obligation in office the old man's hands were wide open to shower
benefice or caprice on the most worthless. Endorsement for cash and
goods to Natsumé, Imaizumi, and Kamimura; donations to the temples of
Teramachi and the Yotsuyazaka; favours in every direction except that of
Akiyama Cho[u]zaémon, in the pursuit of whom Kwaiba found much
amusement; all these items added to the very free living in his
household had pledged deeply the ample revenue of two hundred and thirty
_tawara_, and would have upheld the _samurai_ trait of not knowing the
value of money--if Kwaiba had been of that kind. Between Kwaiba and
Kibei, the wild debauchery of the last year had brought the House to the
verge of ruin. Kibei was aghast. Long since he had become deeply
involved with the Kashiku Tamagiku of the Yamadaya in Edomachi
Itcho[u]me of the Yoshiwara. The ugly fellow was madly in love with the
beauty. On her he had poured out the treasures of the Ito[u] House
during the six months which preceded the illness of Kwaiba. During his
prolonged absence from her the letters of the Kashiku had inundated the
writing table of Kibei. Had he deserted her? Was all affection gone?
Where now were the promises of ransom, the blood-sealed vow to become
husband and wife, to assume the relation which endures for two worlds?
Kibei sullenly read these lines; cursing Kwaiba and cursing himself.
Ransom! With strict living for the next five years _he_ might set
matters straight and free the Tayu; and any day _she_ might be bought by
some rich country _samurai_ or _go[u]shi_ (gentleman farmer), or be
carried off to ornament the _besso[u]_ of some _hatamoto_. Kibei wiped
the bitter saliva from his lips.[32]

The domestic difficulties were accompaniment to these more important
matters. In the large mansion Kibei was now alone. The tenth day had
witnessed the flight of the last of the servants. The women had departed
with the funeral, through fear, sacrificing wages and even such clothing
as could not surreptitiously be removed. What woman--or man--could
remain in a house which was the nightly scene of such fearful sounds of
combat. Shrieks, wails, groans, came from the quarters once occupied by
the dead Kwaiba. As to this there was no difference of opinion. The more
venturesome had been favoured with actual sight of the scenes enacted.
They had seen the old man as he was in death, pursued from room to room
by two frightful hags, as gaunt, blear, sightless as himself. Dreadful
were the cries of the dead man as the harpies fastened upon him,
descending from above like two huge bats. These scenes took place
usually at the eighth hour (1 A.M.), not to cease until dawn. As for the
men servants, they took their leave in the days following, asking formal
dismissal (_itoma_) with recommendation to another House. They scented
the approaching ruin of their present employer.

One day Kakusuké presented himself. Kibei looked up. He understood at
once that the man had come in his turn to take leave. Kakusuké alone had
remained with him. He was _chu[u]gen_, stable boy, cook, maid; and did
the work of all four without complaint. The change in his master was too
marked. Kibei, in his turn, had become irritable, timorous as a girl,
subject to outbreaks of almost insane rage. To Kakusuké the young man
seemed to have lost all nerve. Kakusuké wanted to serve a man. As long
as the Wakadono gave promise of redemption, of rising above his
difficulties and emerging into a splendid career in which Kakusuké could
take pride, the _chu[u]gen_ was ready to take the bitter with the sweet.
To be maid servant and keeper of a man half mad had no attraction for
this blunt-nerved fellow. He spoke plainly--"The Wakadono should deign
to throw up the whole connection. Under the present conditions the ruin
of the House is unavoidable. Condescend to return to the original House
in Honjo[u] Yokogawa. This course will be best. At least the Wakadono
secures his own salvation. This is the advice of Kakusuké, grown old in
experience of service in a _samurai_ household. In naught else is there
hope. As to himself, would the Wakadono condescend to grant dismissal."
Long had been the intimacy between Ito[u] Kwaiba and Inagaki Sho[u]gen.
Kakusuké, the messenger between the two Houses, had watched this
Fukutaro[u] (Kibei) grow to manhood, had noted his prowess. It was with
delight he had carried the documents which were to bring this new and
vigorous blood into the home of his decadent master. This was the
result. "A pest on these witches--and their craft!"

Kibei heard him out with growing anger. As the man's words gathered
vigour and plain spokenness his hand wandered to his sword. He had a mind
to cut him down then and there for his freedom of speech. More than half
induced to recognize the truth of the indictment his better feeling halted
him. With harsh and sardonic tone he gave unbelieving thanks for the
implied reproof of the _chu[u]gen_. The service of Kakusuké had been
faithful beyond measure. It should have its proper reward. If others had
chosen to depart as do those who run away, they had shown ignorance of
this Kibei. From a drawer of the desk he took out a letter already
prepared, a roll containing wages. He pushed the _zen_ toward Kakusuké.
This readiness, as if foreseen, hit the man hard. Respectfully he pressed
the letter to his forehead, bowing with extended hands on the _tatami_;
the money he did not touch. Finally he raised a timid questioning glance
to his one-time master. Said Kibei jeeringly--"Kakusuké has given his
advice. Is it part of his long experience that a servant should question
the wages placed under his nose? Off with you! This Kibei would be alone;
most willingly so." At the peremptory threatening gesture Kakusuké no
longer hesitated. He had no inclination to be a victim of one of the mad
outbreaks of the young man. Taking the roll humbly he backed out of the
room. His steps were heard a few minutes later passing the entrance. Then
the outer gate shut to with a clang.

For a long watch Kibei sat in meditation. He was as one who sleeps.
Then he rose with decision. "'Tis the last chance. Kakusuké is right.
The matter is to be brought to an end." Dressing for the street he left
the house. He opened the big gate; then went to the stable, and saddled
and bridled his horse. He led it outside, closed the gate, and mounting
he rode forth, to go to Honjo[u] Yokogawa and the _yashiki_ of his
father, Inagaki Sho[u]gen. Coming unaccompanied he was received with
surprise and some discomfiture, as he was quick to note. He was very
quick to note things in these days. Prostrating himself before his
mother--"Kibei presents himself. Honoured mother, deign to pardon the
intrusion. Fukutaro[u] would solicit her pity and influence." The lady
looked at him with amazement. "Fukutaro[u]! What then of Kibei? Is some
jest deigned at the mother's expense? It is in very bad taste.... But
the face of Kibei implies no jest. Pray put the matter plainly. Why does
her son come in petition to the mother?" Began Kibei--"The matter is
most serious...." He went into the full details; from the time of his
entrance into the Ito[u] House, through the course of dissipation and
illness of Kwaiba, down to the present ruined state of affairs. "All
this is due to the curse of O'Iwa San, to this plot in which Kibei
foolishly engaged." Of this he now fully felt the force. The events of
the past weeks had wrecked him in mind and body. One disaster after
another, in house and ward, had been visited on Kibei. The bitterness
and dislike of the people toward Kwaiba was visited on his
representative, who was held responsible. In his great mansion he lived
alone. No servant would enter it to attend to his wants. Was he to cook
and be valet for himself--and pose as the Kumi-gashira, the great chief
of the ward! The position was an impossible one. Deign to use a mother's
influence with Inagaki Dono. "Condescend to secure permission for the
return of this Kibei to his original House, for the cancellation of the
adoption."

The wife of Sho[u]gen sat frightened; at the tale, and at this radical
way of finding an exit from the situation. The mother's heart was full of
pity for the distracted son, whose haggard looks showed the strain of the
past weeks. Besides she was a woman, and as such fully believed in and
feared the curse of this dead O'Iwa, one who had died without funeral
rites or prayer. "Fortunately the honoured father now is on the night
watch at the castle. He is at home, drinking his wine. His humour is
excellent. Wait but a moment." Leaving Kibei she went to the room of
Sho[u]gen's light indulgence. The severe and conscientious nobleman was
bending under the genial influence of the _saké_. "Kibei? He comes in good
season. The heir of Kwaiba Inkyo[u] has not favoured his real father of
late. Ah! The boy was well placed. Kwaiba soon made way for him; and none
too willingly, one can believe." He chuckled. Then noting his wife's
troubled looks. "But there is something to tell."--"So indeed; none too
pleasant." She went into the story Kibei had told her. "His fear of O'Iwa
San is deadly. The House is ruined, with no profit in the connection.
Deign to permit the cancellation of the adoption, his return to the House
of his true parent." She stopped before the stern astonished look of the
husband. Said he harshly--"Let him come up. Sho[u]gen answers Kibei Dono
in person.... Heigh! Up here with you! For Ito[u] Dono there is wine...."
Kibei entered joyfully at his father's call. Success was in his hands.
Once more he was to marshal his father's retainers and accompany him to
the castle; once more be the habitué of the fencing rooms. "Honoured
father, fear enters: for long this Kibei has not ventured into your
presence."--"And need not for long again," thundered the old man. "What
stuff is this for the ears of Sho[u]gen? Kibei would sever his connection
with the Ito[u] House. Kibei is afraid of a ghost! He fears a girl! A
_samurai_ wearing two swords shrinks from an encounter with a woman! Has
Sho[u]gen no obligation toward his old friend Kwaiba? In more serious
matters and in life Sho[u]gen would share Kwaiba's lot. Back with you to
the house in Yotsuya! If this matter become known, both Kibei and
Sho[u]gen will be the laughing stocks of Edo. At least keep such fears to
yourself. Off with you! Sho[u]gen had wine for Ito[u] Dono. For the fellow
who would call himself--Fukutaro[u], he has none." With a kick he sent
rolling the _zen_ (table) with its burden of bottles and heating
apparatus. In a rage he left the room.

Kibei's face was white as he raised it from the _tatami_. "Father has no
experience of ghosts; he speaks at random and in anger. Terrible is the
actuality." Said the mother, slowly and painfully--"He is the father; he
is to be obeyed." Kibei was sitting upright. He nodded grave assent.
Then suddenly he prostrated himself ceremoniously before the _sho[u]ji_
through which Sho[u]gen had disappeared. He repeated the salutation
before his mother. Then he rose--"Ito[u] Kibei takes leave. May good
health and fortune visit those of this House." At his exit the mother
rejoiced. Severe had been the father's words, but they had brought the
boy to reason. She wept and trembled at the reproof. Men had best
knowledge of such affairs. She would pray at Reiganji, and have memorial
service held for the peace of this O'Iwa in the next world. Then the
curse would not rest upon her son.

On his appearance at the house entrance an _ashigaru_ (foot soldier)
led up the horse. Kibei waved him away--"For the present keep the animal
in charge. With matters to attend to close at hand Kibei will use other
conveyance." The man took the animal away. Leaving the gate of the
_yashiki_ Kibei walked the short distance to the Ho[u]onji bridge. Here
was a _kago_ (litter) stand. "To Yamadaya in Yoshiwara." As the _kago_
men went off at a trot--"Kibei has played and lost. How does the account
yonder stand? Seventy _ryo[u]_ owed at the Matsuminatoya. For the rest,
this Kibei can claim a night's attendance from the _kashiku_. If
affection would not grant it, the huge sums bestowed in the past have a
claim upon her. Then to end matters and die like a _samurai_. To-morrow
Kibei cuts belly." It was the debt which sent him direct to the
Yamadaya, and not first to the tea house. Sitting over the wine all
effort of the Kashiku to enliven him failed. Noting her discomfiture he
smiled gloomily. Then in explanation--"The thoughts of Kibei go astray.
The House is ruined. Ransom is impossible. This is the last meeting.
To-morrow Kibei cuts belly, and dies like a _samurai_." At first the
girl thought he was joking. Then noting the wild look of despair in his
eyes, she was frightened. Partly in disbelief; partly seeking to
postpone this desperate resolve, to turn his thoughts and gain time for
reflection; partly in that sentimental mood which at times affects this
class of women--"Is Kibei truly ruined? Lamentable the fate of Tamagiku.
Why not join him in death? But the idea is too new. Deign to postpone
the execution for a space. To-night shall be a night of pleasure with
the Kashiku Tamagiku. With the morrow's darkness she dies with Kibei.
Hand in hand they will wander the paths of Amida's paradise." She came
close to him in service of the wine; put her arms about him, and drew
him to her bosom; in every way cajoled and sought to comfort him, and
corrupt his purpose. Consent was easy. The night was passed in love and
wine. In the morning he left her.

Kibei was making his final preparations; writing directions which
would benefit as far as possible the House in Honjo[u] at the expense of
that in Yotsuya. In the Yoshiwara a very different scene was taking
place. With his departure the Kashiku sprang up. Hastily throwing a robe
around her person she sought the room of the _yarité_--the bawd of the
house. "The Kashiku! At this hour--what has happened?"--"Something of
importance. This night Tama dies with Kibei Dono. The compact is closed,
hard and firm." The astonished bawd had been rubbing the sleep out of
her eyes. The last words brought her full awake--"Is the Kashiku drunk
with wine? Is she mad? Truly it would seem so. And the bail? What is to
become of the unfortunate? True it is Toémon of Honjo[u]; and he has
trouble enough already. He will never leave his prison." Tamagiku made a
gesture of impatience--"This Tama has acted but to gain time. Can she
have affection for such an ugly fellow? Was she to be the victim of some
crazy outburst? Perhaps the day will bring better counsel; but the
night's conversation does not augur it. His plans are most complete. The
master must be seen. Deign to mediate; prevent the admittance of Kibei
Dono as guest." O'Kayo the bawd nodded intelligence and assent. At once
she sought the master of the house. "A dangerous guest," was his
comment. "Send to the Matsuminatoya. They must be warned. We can look
after ourselves." As an attendant of the tea house presented
himself--"And the master, Teisuké San!"--"Is absent; this To[u]suké
represents him. He has gone to Edo. Perhaps the house will deign to look
at a new inmate. A true Tayu! The daughter of Akiyama San of Yotsuya
sacrifices her caste. But sixteen years, she is a jewel. Less than a
hundred _ryo[u]_ will buy her. He is in great difficulties." To[u]suké
spoke with enthusiasm. The master of the Yamadaya answered promptly and
with emphasis--"Accepted: let her be on hand in the course of the day.
But To[u]suké, there is another matter. Kibei Dono no longer can be
accepted as a guest." He went into details. To[u]suké drew a long
breath. "A dangerous fellow! The Danna Sama never liked his presence.
But he owes the house much money; seventy _ryo[u]_."--"That is your
affair," coldly replied the master of the Yamadaya. "This house answers
not for the accounts of the tea-house. Previous notice has been given.
Kibei Dono cannot be received as guest."--"That is not to be denied. He
is most undesirable. But the seventy _ryo[u]_! And the week's settlement
to make with this house?" The Yamadaya had an idea--"It rarely passes a
hundred _ryo[u]_.... Five years is accepted? Then take thirty _ryo[u]_
and deliver this girl to the Yamadaya.... A true Tayu? If so the debt of
Kibei finds payment." To[u]suké agreed with joy.

At night the _kago_ man set Kibei down before the Matsuminatoya.
Teisuké, the _teishu[u]_ (host), regarded his arrival with mixed
feelings. His coming meant something. Giving up his two swords, and once
seated, Kibei's first act was to give thanks for past services. Calling
for his account he produced the seventy _ryo[u]_ in its settlement.
Prompt and profound were the humble thanks of the house for this
unexpected liquidation. Kibei had secured the money by the transfer of
obligations of Akiyama Cho[u]zaémon to the usurer Suzuki Sanjuro[u].
Three hundred and fifty _ryo[u]_ immediately due against seventy
_ryo[u]_ in cash satisfied even this shark. Teisuké was impressed. How
deny such a guest? He would get rid of him, and profit both ways.
Yamadaya now would promptly pay the additional seventy _ryo[u]_ due on
the girl with whom they were so delighted. He had paid fifty _ryo[u]_
for her. At Kibei's call his order was prompt. "To[u]suké, accompany
Kibei Dono to the Yamadaya." Kibei's calm and collected manner reassured
him. This man did not contemplate suicide.

With the appearance of To[u]suké and Kibei at the Yamadaya there was a
flutter. The Banto[u] Matsuzo respectfully came forward. As Kibei came
up to the _ro[u]ka_ and shook off his _geta_ he interposed. "Deign to
wait, Kibei Dono. Matters have changed since morning. The Kashiku is
very ill. She can see no one. Condescend to come another time. For one
ill in body pleasure is no pastime. Pray consider; grant excuse for this
one occasion." Kibei was surprised. He had left her perfectly well in
the morning. Something in the _banto[u]'s_ face, in the massed position
of the men standing by, apprised him of the truth. He was enraged at the
lie and the insult. "Ill? That is very strange, when so well at morning.
But it is immaterial. Kibei goes to the room."--"Impossible," was the
firm reply of the _banto[u]_. "The Kashiku lies isolated from all. It is
the order of the physician. Even those in the rooms around her have been
ordered out. Pray forbear." But Kibei was obstinate--"Then a glass of
wine at her bedside; Kibei has matters to impart." The _banto[u]_ stuck
to his post--"Wine! Amid the smell of drugs, the unseemly vessels of the
sick room! Such could not be permitted." Kibei stretched out an arm. The
_banto[u]_ went flying a dozen feet. Kibei made a leap toward the
stairway. But the bawd O'Kayo interposed her vinegary presence. She was
brave; having the support of great numbers, of the whole household.
"What rudeness! How inconsiderate your way of acting! You behave in very
bad taste; with the roughness of an _ashigaru_ (foot soldier). The
Yamadaya does not entertain such miserable scamps. The Tayu is ill. This
Kayo says it. Get you hence--to some coolie house. Return the day before
yesterday."[33] Kibei gave a yell--"Yai! You old bitch! The whole affair
is plain to Kibei. Out of money, his presence is no longer desired. Ah!
Kibei will have vengeance." Without arms, before the sullen
determination of these plebeians, he felt his helplessness. An unseemly
brawl, in which he would be worsted, must not be entered on. He must
leave. In a towering rage he strode back to the tea-house. To[u]suké
tried to keep pace with him.

Said Teisuké in feigned astonishment--"Kibei Dono! What has happened?"
Kibei did but stutter and fume. The _teishu[u]_ turned to To[u]suké.
This latter made answer for his charge--"At the Yamadaya they were very
rude. Admittance was refused to Kibei Dono. The bawd O'Kayo told him to
come back day before yesterday!"--"Very rude indeed! Were such things
said? It is unpardonable. An explanation must be had with the house.
Danna Sama, for to-night deign to leave this matter to Teisuké. Ample
satisfaction shall be had for the outrage." Teisuké threw up his hands
as with uncontrollable anger. Kibei paid no attention, but demanded his
swords. Outwardly he had regained his self-control. The maid O'Moto
looked with diffidence at her mistress. The woman was accustomed to such
scenes. At her sign the girl brought the weapons, carefully wrapped up.
She placed them before Kibei. Unrolling the cover he put them on. With
scanty salutation he strode off. Teisuké watched him--"It would be wise
for the Yamadaya to close early to-night, to take in their lanterns;
nay, even to board up the front and take refuge in the store-house."
To[u]suké was in no hurry to face Matsuzo, the _banto[u]_ of Yamadaya.
Continued the easy old fellow--"Well, 'tis their affair. They are as
good judges as Teisuké; and they could have been more civil in refusal.
At all events the house has seventy _ryo[u]_, and Kibei Dono is sober.
He will cut belly before dawn; and perhaps nothing will happen
hereabouts." The old pimp went off to his inner room; to sit down before
his wine about the same time that Kibei did the same in a cook shop
opposite the great gate of Yoshiwara. Here he idled, barely touched his
drink, and passed the time in bantering the maid servant. He was in a
riotous humour. He would take her to wife--and sell her the next
morning. "As they do yonder." But O'Kiyo was not of that kind. "There is
a lover?"--"Of course!" In admitting it she blushed, somewhat offended
at hint of suspicion that such was lacking. Jibed Kibei--"He will do the
same. Better to be the wife of a _samurai_; even for an hour." In the
end he frightened the girl a good deal, so boisterous was he. She had
gone out to buy him a deep hat. With relief she saw him put it on and
set forth into the darkness and the rain.

The eighth hour (1 A.M.) was nearly ready to strike. The pleasure quarter
was silent. Passersby were few. The occasional shuffling sound of
_zo[u]ri_ (sandals) could be heard behind the closed _amado_. Kibei smiled
cynically as he recognized this mark of revolting passage from one room to
another. In doubt he stood before the gate of the Yamadaya. How break in
and kill them all? If Kibei had his way the Kashiku would keep her word.
Just then a noise of voices was heard within, the falling of the bar.
Several belated guests came forth. They were in the charge of O'Moto, the
maid of the Matsuminatoya. Affectionate were the leave-takings with the
quondam wives. "Condescend an early visit. This Haya lives but in the
thought of Mosuké."--"Bunzaémon San, be faithful to this Hana. In his
absence she is always ill. She receives no one." At this there was a roar
of laughter from the others of the company. Bunzaémon answered with
reproaches. Kibei followed behind. This fellow was somewhat lamed. He
lagged behind. Kibei pulled his sleeve. Bunzaémon, the cit, turned in
surprise and fear at sight of the _samurai_ in his deep hat. Said
Kibei--"Don't be afraid. Bunzaémon San has forgotten pipe, or purse, or
something. He must go back to the Yamadaya." At the fellow's groping in
his garments and failure to understand he grew impatient. "A friend lies
at the Yamadaya. It is late, and they will not open at an unknown voice.
Entrance somehow must be had. Deign to lend your aid." At last the fellow
comprehended--"O'Moto San! A moment: my pipe...."--"Oya! The Danna Sama
has forgotten his pipe?" The girl went back the short distance to the
gate. She knocked and called. With sleepy tones the voice of Matsuzo the
_banto[u]_ was heard. The bar fell. The girl turned to look down the
street toward her guests. She looked right into the face of Kibei.
Dropping her lantern, with a smothered scream she fled.

Matsu, the _banto[u]_, looked with horror at the man before him. As
Kibei threw off his hat he turned to flee. Tripping, he fell. Kibei drew
him back by the leg. A blow cut him through the shoulder. As he rose
staggering a second vicious side swing sent the severed head to the
ground. The gate-man took the chance. Fleeing to the recesses of the
kitchen, he swarmed up a post and hid himself among the rafters of the
roof, amid the darkness of their shadows. Kibei turned back and
carefully barred the gate. With the key at the girdle of Matsuzo he
locked the bar chain. All was now ready for his visitation and search.

On the floor above they had a drunken guest in hand, trying to get him
to depart. A _banto[u]_ and several women formed the committee of
expulsion. "Ah! Money gone, one's welcome is quickly worn out in this
hell. But Jusuké does not budge. He fears not the whole pack of
foxes.... Thanks: deep the obligation of this Jusuké, extending to the
next life." A woman had picked up and restored his purse. "The bill is
paid? An early start To[u]kaido[u] way? Ah, true! Jusuké had forgotten."
He was now all compliments and thanks. Then in a rage--"Oh! The huzzy!
What is Jusuké's purse worth with nothing in it? Who has robbed the
purse of Jusuké?" He was madly fumbling his tobacco pouch. A woman put
his hand on the missing object in the folds of his girdle. He was
mollified. As they moved to the head of the stairs--"Take care! Jusuké
San, don't fall! Banto[u] San, deign to aid the guest." Refusing all
help the man lurched half way down the flight. Then he stopped, staring
and looking before him. At the foot stood Kibei, bloody sword in hand.
"Down with this Jusuké? But Jusuké cannot down. A fool blocks the
way.... Fool, you block the way of Jusuké."--"Out of the road,
drunkard!" The words of Kibei came between his teeth, half growl, half
snarl. The man obstinately held his own. When Kibei would push past
him--"Beast!" He struck the _samurai_. Kibei whirled the sword. The head
rolled to the bottom of the steps. The blood bathed Kibei from head to
foot.

His appearance was horrible. The women fled in all directions. The
_banto[u]_ covered their retreat. "Kibei Dono! Pray be reasonable.
Control yourself!" Kibei made a step toward the women's rooms. The
_banto[u]_ was dreadfully frightened, yet bravely he interposed to save
them. He shouted for aid; below and to the neighbours. Kibei reached
him. A blow and he fell severed. Kibei gave a howl of joy. O'Kayo the
bawd came out to ascertain the cause of the brawl. She turned livid with
fear on recognizing Kibei. They were standing together in the sort of
entresol or room at the head of the stairway. Only a large brazier
separated Kibei from his vengeance. Its massiveness of three or four
feet breadth baffled him. The woman was fleeing for life. As he strove
to get within striking distance fear gave her wings. From one side to
another she leaped and dodged. Kibei was hampered. He had to cut her off
from stair and _ro[u]ka_. As he hesitated she discharged the iron kettle
at his head. One implement followed another. In hurling the iron tripod
ashes entered her eyes. At once Kibei leaped to close quarters. The
first sword blow she dodged. As Kibei recovered she sprang by him and
over the _hibachi_, seeking the safety of the stairs now open to her.
Her night-dress caught on the handle of the brazier and brought her to
the ground. Next moment she was severed from shoulder to midriff.

Methodically Kibei began his examination of the rooms. To most of the
inmates this uproar was a mere quarrel in the house, the cause of which
they neither knew nor cared to know. The first search was at the room of
the Kashiku, close to that of O'Kayo the bawd. Her reception room was
dark. Here the Kashiku's bed usually was prepared. The inner room, her
dressing room, showed the dim light of an _andon_. Noting her absence
from the usual place a hasty stride brought him to the _sho[u]ji_. As he
violently shoved them apart a man rose from the bed in the room. A mere
glance showed that this was no lover. As Kibei with drawn sword stood
over him, he squatted on his hams, crouching and begging for life. To
Kibei's astonishment he called him by name--"Deign, honoured Sir, to
spare this Cho[u]bei. Be assured the Kashiku is not in this place. She
lies to-night with the Danna of the house. Deign to seek her in his
company." He pointed vaguely as he spoke, to give direction. Kibei
laughed ferociously. From this source these directions were atrocious.
He lowered the weapon--"Cho[u]bei! At this place and time! Well met,
good Sir. Kibei is doubly grateful for what he has learned. Cho[u]bei
and Kibei are fellows in fortune. Willingly Kibei leaves him to O'Iwa
San and her mercies." His attentive gaze never wandered from the face of
the one-time pimp. With a gesture of horror he rushed from the room. In
fright Cho[u]bei rolled his head up in the coverlet, to keep out the
vision evoked.

He continued his search--"Is it my little black fellow?" Such the
greeting of one woman aroused from sleep. Trembling she rose at sight of
Kibei. Harshly told to lie down, she gladly obeyed. Her quivering limbs
already were nearly yielding as he spoke. In but one place did he
encounter opposition. Pushing open the _sho[u]ji_ of the merest closet
of a room he came upon a girl whose face somehow was familiar. She was a
mere slip of a creature to be called a woman. The undeveloped hips, the
yet immature bosom, aroused his astonishment at finding her in such a
place as inmate; that is, until the pure oval and beauty of the face
caught his glance. As he entered she sprang up in alarm. Just roused
from sleep she hardly knew where she was--"Father! Father! A man! A man
is in the room! Help!" Kibei pushed her back on the bed. With his bloody
sword he rolled over the bed-clothes. Then he made a move to get at the
closet behind. Perhaps mistaking his action the girl sprang upon him.
Kibei was startled at her mad energy. When he thrust her down she seized
his hand in her teeth, sinking them deep into it. Pain and
impatience--after all he was pressed for time--overcame him. Unable
otherwise to shake her off he thrust the point of the sword into her
throat and gave a vigorous downward push. Coughing up great clouts of
blood, the girl sank back, dying on the _futon_. As he left the room
remembrance came to Kibei's mind. He had seen her in Yotsuya. More than
once O'Tsuru had served him tea in the house of her father,
Cho[u]zaémon. How came she in this vile den? He took a step back to aid
her if he could. She was stone dead.

The Tayu Nishikiyama[34] now knew the cause of the disturbance. To the
frightened page (_kamuro_) who came running to her--"Be quiet child.
This is no time to lose self-control. Aid me in preparation." She
dressed herself with the greatest care; "all in white, as befitted a
lady in attendance on a nobleman." Then she took down her _koto_ and
struck the opening bars of an old and famous song--the "Jinmujo[u]"
(Inexhaustible Happiness)--said to have been sung by the famous Shizuka
Go[u]zen when she danced the Ho[u]raku, or sacred dance, before the
Sho[u]gun Yoritomo at Kamakura Hachimangu[u]. As Kibei turned into the
corridor the voice of the Oiran caught his ear as she sang in
accompaniment to the instrument. She was bending over the _koto_ as the
_sho[u]ji_ were flung apart. Kibei, his hair hanging in disorder and
framing a face ghastly white in contrast to the red streaks splashed
over it and his garments, stood transfixed at the entrance. The Tayu
looked up. With calm pose and courteous salute--"Kibei Dono, what manner
of acting is this! Is not Kibei Dono the _bushi_? Truly madness has
seized you, honoured Sir. This is Nishikiyama.... Deign to be seated.
'Tis Nishikiyama who serves Kibei Dono. What has been done cannot be
undone. The last cup of wine in life is to be drained. Deign to accept
it from these humble hands."

Kibei continued gazing on her. The unhappy man, his mind was opened to
a flood of light. The hurricane of passion was passing. Slowly he
advanced into the room. "Truly the Go Tayu is right. Kibei has gone mad;
mad indeed!" He sank down on the cushion before her. At a sign the page
placed the stand containing the bottle of cold _saké_ before the lady.
Skilfully the slender hands held it, gracefully poured it for the man
doomed to death, taking this final cup served by her. Kibei raised it,
drained it to the last drop. "The Kashiku: she is on this lower floor.
Where lies she?" Nashikiyama noted the wild light returning to his eyes.
She bowed her head before him--"The life of Nishikiyama is at the
command of Kibei Dono. Her lips are sealed. Honoured Sir, how answer
Kibei Dono's question?" For the moment he looked down. Then he
rose--"Whose daughter can the Oiran be! Truly no lady in the land could
show a higher courage, a finer courtesy. The final salute of this Kibei
in life is to the Go Tayu." In grave ceremony it was performed. As he
left the room the woman buried her face in her hands, weeping bitterly.
In wonder and gratitude the frightened page extended her hands, her face
hidden in the white robes of the Go Tayu.

Kibei trod this lower corridor with sombre tread. He would cut belly at
the garden pond. With some surprise he noted an _amado_ open at the end
of the _ro[u]ka_. Voices were heard. Standing at the opening he saw
lanterns. Some frenzied women had raised a ladder to the garden wall.
They would thus escape, but the knife-like bamboo stakes prevented. Said
a voice outside, and close to him--"The key to the gate: here it is."
The Kashiku at a run passed by him. Kibei gave a shout. The frightened
woman turned, recognized him, then sped on. In a few steps he was on
her. The raised sword descended as she fell on her knees before him, in
attempt to swerve its course. Through wrist and collar-bone, from neck
to navel, the keen blade passed. Kibei threw the weapon aside. He leaned
over her, his dagger drawn. Then he rose, holding by its tresses the
head. For a moment he gazed on it. Slowly he walked to the pond in the
centre of the garden. Carefully he washed the bloody trophy and placed
it on the curbing. Confronting it he made reverential salutation. "Kibei
keeps his promise to the Kashiku. With Tamagiku he treads the gloomy
paths of Shideyama. Honoured lady--a moment and Kibei follows." Seated
before the head reposing on the curb he opened his clothes. Thrusting
the bloody dagger deep into his left side he slowly drew it across the
belly; then made the upward cut. The body fell forward. Kibei indeed had
kept his word.




CHAPTER XXI

MATTERS ECCLESIASTICAL


Inagaki Sho[u]gen received the news at dawn, just as he was leaving the
castle on completion of his night watch. The old knight smiled gravely,
thanked the bearer of the message, and rewarded him with lavish hand.
The _kago_ bearers jolted on. The news had reached the train, and
_chu[u]gen_ and spearman exchanged whispers. On arrival at the Inagaki
_yashiki_ his lordship made no motion to descend. The chamberlain
raising the curtain gave a cry of horror. The old man lay stretched at
the bottom of the little chamber. The dagger and the pool of blood told
the tale. Sho[u]gen had followed the example of his son. He, too, now
trod the paths of Shideyama.

With laggard tottering step Akiyama Cho[u]zaémon entered his house.
Regardless of wife and the cushion she offered, of the hardly repressed
tear in her salutation, he cast himself full length on the mats. He
buried his face in his arms. The groans which issued from the prostrate
body frightened the woman. "The honoured return; has other misfortune
fallen on the House?" A shrug of the shoulders, a shiver; then the man
half rose and faced her. She was startled at his expression. He was
facing the most dreadful, not mere thought of ruin to him and
his--"Suzuki San is liar and thief. Fifty _ryo[u]_ in hand the promise
was for abstention. Now he demands twenty _ryo[u]_ more--the interest on
the debt in full." His voice rose to a harsh scream. He laughed
despairingly. "Seventy-five _ryo[u]_ interest, for the loan of a month;
and that loan forced on this Cho[u]zaémon by Ito[u] Kwaiba! Kibei has
squandered everything. The loan comes back on the bail. If Suzuki holds
the interest in hand, he allows the principal, three hundred and fifty
_ryo[u]_, to stand for the month. Unless he has the lacking twenty-five
_ryo[u]_ by the fourth hour (9 A.M.) to-morrow, complaint is laid at the
office. As usual the interest is written into the face of the bond. The
end is certain. This Cho[u]zaémon must cut belly or suffer degradation
(_kaieki_)." He looked her over critically. The light of hope died out
of his eyes--"Ah! If this Tsuyu could but be sold, the money would be in
hand. But she is old and ugly. Pfaugh!..." How he hated her at this
moment. Some half a dozen years older than Cho[u]zaémon the marriage had
been arranged by the parents on truly financial principles. Mizoguchi
Hampei was rich, and reputed stingy and saving. Just recently he had
fallen into the Edogawa as he returned home late one night. Drunk and
surfeited with the foul waters of the stream they had fished him out
stone dead. Then it was learned that the old fellow of sixty odd years
had several concubines, of the kind to eat into house and fortune. The
reversion of the pension, of course, went to the House. In all these
years Cho[u]zaémon had never received the dower of O'Tsuyu; nor dared to
press the rich man for it, too generous to his daughter to quarrel with.
The funds eagerly looked for by Cho[u]zaémon were found to be _non est
inventus_. Probably, if alive, Mizoguchi would have argued that the
dower had been paid in instalments. In his grave difficulties Akiyama
could find no aid in his wife. She mourned her uselessness--"Willingly
would Tsuyu come to the aid of House and husband, join her daughter in
the bitter service. But past forty years.... 'Tis useless to think of
it. Perhaps some expedient will come to mind." She brought out the arm
rest and placed it near his side. Then she sat apart watching him. From
time to time was heard the tap of her pipe as she knocked out the ashes.
At last, overcome by sleep and seeing no sign of movement on the
husband's part, she went off to bed, expecting that he would soon
follow.

She woke with a start--"Father! Father!" The voice of O'Tsuru rang
sharply in her ears. Dazed she half rose and looked around her. The
daylight streamed through the closed _amado_. She had been dreaming.
With surprise she noted her husband's absence. Had he gone forth? The
cries of a bean curd seller were heard without--"_To[u]fu!_ _To[u]fu!_
The best of _to[u]fu_!" The palatable, cheap, and nutritious food was a
standard meal in this house as in many others of Nippon. Akiyama was
most generous in indulgence of his passions for gambling, wine, and the
women of Shinjuku; and his household with equal generosity were indulged
in an economical regimen of _to[u]fu_. The wife rose to answer the call
of the street huckster. Her surprise increased as she found every means
of exit bolted and barred, as during the night. The open sliding window
in the kitchen roof caught her eye. Surely he had not departed that way!
As she opened the back door a murmur of voices, as in the roadway or
close by, struck her ear. The _to[u]fu_ seller had his head turned away
looking upward. At her call he turned quickly with apology--"Good day,
honoured lady. A strange event! Ah! The honoured household still sleeps.
All is silent.... Strange indeed! A man has hung himself on the big oak
tree in the temple ground. Deign to look." He pointed to the big tree
close by in the grounds of the Myo[u]gyo[u]ji.[35] Sure enough: forty
feet from the ground dangled the body of a man. It swayed gently to and
fro in harmony with the movement of the branches. A hand seemed to grasp
the heart of Tsuyu. The branches of the tree reached far over their
roof. The open _hikimado_! With feeble voice she said--"My husband; he
is strangely absent. Deign, somebody, to climb up and find out whether
this man is--of the ward." The startled _to[u]fu_ seller hastened to get
aid. Several men entered the garden, quickly mounted to the roof, and
thus reached the tree. Said the topmost fellow--"Ma! Ma! It is no pretty
sight. He makes a hideous spectacle. The face is black as a rice boiler.
The eyes stand out as if ready to burst. The tongue hangs out like a
true guard (_hyo[u]tan_). The grin on the distended mouth is not nice to
see. Ah! The rascal has used the merest cord to cut himself off. And he
has nearly done so. The head is almost severed." He gave a
shout--"Naruhodo! Why, its...." One close by silenced him. The men above
looked down. They made signs to those below. The women gathered around
O'Tsuyu as if to keep her from the sight. She broke away from them as
the body was gently lowered to the ground. Her shrieks rang loud. They
strove to detach her from the dead body of Cho[u]zaémon. The House
ruined, daughter and husband taken out of her life in a single day; the
blow was too crushing for a brain harassed by a life with this debauched
worthless man. Her warders struggled with one gone clean daft. Years
after men grown up from childhood in the ward looked with pity at the
feeble ragged old mad beggar woman who crouched by the beautiful bronze
dragon which ornaments the water basin of the Ten-o[u] Jinja. They would
drop in her hand a copper "cash," and drive off with rebuke the children
who taunted and annoyed her--as they had done years before. Thus were
mother and daughter--the innocent--involved in the father's crime
against the dread Lady of Tamiya.

All these events created a tremendous stir in Yotsuya. Men disliked to
go abroad at night. Women, to their great inconvenience were confined to
the house. Two figures approaching each other in the darkness would be
seen to hesitate and stop. "What's that--standing, slinking yonder by
the wall? Alas! This Kinsaburo[u], this Genzaémon has evil fortune led
him into the clutches of the O'Baké? O'Iwa! O'Iwa!" With that and mad
cries they would fall on each other; at times only to exercise restraint
after some injury had been done. Hence quarrels arose; feuds, started in
all innocence, came into being. Women, as suspects, were chief
sufferers. The local atmosphere was overcharged, nerve racked. And so
from Honjo[u] to Nakacho[u] (Shinjuku), from Nakanocho[u] (Yoshiwara) to
Shinagawa, even in the nearer post towns of Kawasaki, Tsurumi, and
Kanagawa the talk was spreading of the strange happenings in Yotsuya of
Edo town. Katada Tatéwaki, descendant of that Katada Samon who, as
vassal of Gongen Samon (Iyeyasu) had had this Aoyama-Yotsuya district in
fief, now first began his inquiries into the affair. The Katada had wide
possessions elsewhere at the time of the grant. Samon had gifted much of
his new fief as temple land, and on the old maps of the day this part of
Edo is a blood red splash, indication of these many establishments. But
the Katada influence still prevailed through the ward, indeed through
the more than good will of the beneficiaries. Tatéwaki's _yashiki_ was
at the top of Ushigomézaka. His modest pension of a thousand _koku_ by
no means represented the extent of his power. Iémon became frightened at
the storm gathering against him. He was open to all suggestions of
remedy for the cataleptic state into which O'Hana had fallen. The
neighbour gossips suggested calling in the Daiho[u]-in of Shiomachi. A
service kept part at least of the money in the ward. They had their
share in provision and consumption; the fifty _ryo[u]_ necessary were
much to them--and to Iémon in his present circumstances.

The neighbours were assembled at Tamiya. Iémon went forth to greet the
Daiho[u]-in. With his attendant _kannushi_ and train he presented
himself at the entrance. Iémon was prostrate in salutation before the
great man.--"Reverential thanks for the condescension. Deign to enter
this unfortunate house." The Shinto[u] priest was brusque, as is the way
of the kind. Himself he was the _samurai_, with all the tone of official
manner. "Ha! Ha! Salutation to all." He gave a comprehensive glance
through the assembly and lost none of them in the process. He approached
the couch of O'Hana. He opened the closed eyes, which stared fixedly
into space as of one dead. He raised an arm upright from the body.
Stepping aside, he squatted. Some moments passed. The arm remained
rigidly upright. Satisfied, the Daiho[u]-in signed to his attendants.
Raising O'Hana they placed her in a sitting posture on a mat. Her hair
was arranged in _icho[u]mage_.[36] A _gohei_ was placed between her
hands. Then the Daiho[u]-in began the recitation of the prayers and
charms. The other priests gave voice at times in response. All present
were awe-struck. The women hardly breathed, leaning eagerly forward.
Their eyes took on a vacant stare, as if themselves mesmerized. The
_gohei_ began to tremble; then to shake violently. The woman's hair fell
down in disorder around her face. All turned away their faces. Some
women gave smothered cries. It was O'Iwa San who glared at them out of
those eyes. The Daiho[u]-in eagerly leaned close over O'Hana--"O'Iwa:
where are you? What has become of your body? Be sure to speak the truth.
Don't attempt to lie to the priest.... You don't know? Ah! you would be
obstinate in your grudge. The charm shakes and quivers; it possesses
O'Iwa.... You would rest in Samoncho[u] ground? That is much to ask;
particularly when the body is not in hand.... A substitute will do? Ah!
Prayers?... For a year, at morn and night of each day? That is terrific.
Consider the cost.... You care not for the cost! Only then will you
cease to afflict the ward?... Very well: humbly this Daiho[u]-in
transmits the will of the dead."

Thus did the priestly mediator interpret to his gaping auditors the
mumbling and cries given forth by O'Hana. The wild look faded from her
eyes. She rolled over as in a faint. The priests raised her up. The
Daiho[u]-in turned to Iémon and the assembly--"The words of O'Iwa have
been heard through this woman. O'Hana has been possessed by O'Iwa. Hence
her trance.... Heigh! Water!" He began making passes over his
patient--"The stage has passed. O'Hana no longer is possessed by O'Iwa.
The wronged lady leaves O'Hana to peace. O'Hana is completely herself
again. O'Iwa is all delusion. O'Hana believes this. She believes firmly.
The Daiho[u]-in tells her to believe. O'Iwa does not haunt O'Hana. O'Iwa
has no ill will against O'Hana." He looked fixedly and with command into
the eyes of O'Hana. His voice rang clear and authoritative. Then he
began gently to stroke the back of her head, her neck and spine. "All is
well?" "Hai! Hai! This Hana is completely restored. All is well." With a
little sigh she sank back, to be laid on the cushions in a sleep which
all wondered to see was most natural. Those present were in transports
of delight. They buzzed approval as the Daiho[u]-in addressed Iémon.
"The Daiho[u]-in has done his part. All have heard the words of O'Iwa
San. The rest lies with the temple. Deign to receive these words. The
Daiho[u]-in returns." With his pack voicing loudly at his tail he left
the entrance gate. The assembly streamed after. Iémon was left alone,
biting his thumbs in helpless rage. He was aghast. "The old fox! What is
to be done, pressed as Iémon is for funds? How is this Iémon to act?
Refusal means the open hostility of the whole ward. It will turn against
him. Ah! What a miserable old scamp. He did it all himself; he and his
confederates. The gods descend from above; the Daiho[u]-in shakes the
_gohei_ from below--and those fools believe, to the ruin of Iémon!"

Hence he would have postponed the costly appeal to the temple. Within
the week a committee of the ward waited upon him. As if expecting them,
Iémon gave ready compliance. With four or five other gentlemen he waited
upon Shu[u]den Osho[u], the famous priest of the temple of the Gyo[u]ran
Kwannon. The Lady Merciful, Kwannon Sama, seemed the fitting deity to
whom appeal should be made. A word is to be said as to this famous
manifestation of the goddess. Told by Ryuo[u] at length, of necessity
here the account is much abridged. Gyo[u]ran Kwannon--Kwannon of the
fish-basket--has several other names. She is called the Namagusai
Kwannon, from the odour of fresh blood attached to the pursuit; the
Byaku Kwannon, or the white robed; the Baryufu Kwannon, as wife of Baryu
the fisherman. The image of the Byaku Kwannon exists.[37] It is carved
in white wood, stained black, with a scroll in the right hand, and
holding a fish basket (_gyo[u]ran_) in the left hand. The story of
Baryu, and of his connection with Kwannon, is of more moment.

In Morokoshi (China) there is a place called Kinshaden. Across the bay
from Edo-To[u]kyo[u] is Kazusa with its ninety-nine villages, one of
which has the same name--Kinshaden. The fishing population of Nippon is
a rough lot. From babyhood there is little but quarrelling and fighting
between the bands which control the different wards of the villages. The
relations between the people are very primitive. One of the important
occupations is the _iwashi_, or pilchard, fishing. To pull in the nets
loaded with the fish requires the united effort of the whole village
population, men, women, even children. Among their toilers the people of
Kinshaden noted a young girl of some sixteen or seventeen years; easily
noted by the great beauty and attraction of face and figure, the willing
readiness and wonderful strength she showed in her struggles with the
weighted net. As she appeared several times at last some men went up to
her--"Girl, you are a stranger here. For your aid thanks are offered.
Who may you be; and whence from? Strangers, even in kindness, in Nippon
must not conceal their names." The girl smiled.--"I come from
Fudarakusan in the South Ocean.... Where is Fudarakusan? It is in
India.... And India? It is in the South Ocean, the Nankai." To the
wonder expressed at her coming such a distance of thousands of _ri_--"I
come, I serve, for my husband."--"Your husband? Pray who may he be, in
these parts?"--"Not yet is he chosen," answered the girl. "Come! The
nets are drawn, the fishing ended for the day. I will ascend that rock;
read the sutra of the Lady Kwannon. He who can first memorize it shall
be my husband." Ready was the assent to such an attractive proposal--a
beautiful helpmate in prospect, one endowed with surprising strength for
her frail form, and who seemed to bring luck to the efforts of the
village in the struggle for a livelihood. Even the Nipponese prejudice
against strangers paled before such practical qualification.

The maid ascended to the rostrum. For three days she read and expounded
the holy sutra of the Lady Kwannon. On the fourth day the fisherman
Baryu--young, handsome, strong--felt sure that he could answer to the
test. "Woman, descend! To-day this Baryu will repeat the sutra, expound
its meaning." With seeming surprise and merriment the girl obeyed. Baryu
took her place. Without slip or fault he repeated the sutra, expounded
the intricacies of its meaning. The girl bowed low in submission.
"Condescend to admit my humble person to the hut of Baryu the fisherman.
To-night she pollutes with her presence a corner of his bed-chamber."
Rejoicing Baryu at once took her to his home, where he would act the
husband. At first gently she rebuked him. "These rough people of
Kinshaden have regard to nothing! There is such a rite as marriage. Nine
times are the _saké_ cups to be drained between husband and wife. Thus
is established this important relation. In the connection between man
and woman there is such a thing as etiquette. This observed, the woman
passes to the possession of the man. For the woman, second marriage
there is none."

Thus were the decencies of the marriage bed taught to the rough
fisherman. Near dawn Baryu awoke with surprise. His bed-fellow was in the
last extremities. Dripping with sweat, she seemed to be melting away.
Already she was unconscious. Then vomiting forth water she died. Baryu was
tremendously put out. To lose a wife, who barely had been a wife; one so
beautiful, so strong; this was extremely vexatious. "This won't do at all!
Why has such a misfortune befallen this Baryu? O'Kabe (Miss Plaster) and
O'Nabé (Miss Stewpan) endured without mishap the passage of their marriage
night.... Hai! Hai!" in reply to a friend knocking at the door. "Baryu
cannot go to the fishing to-day.... The woman? She has died. Baryu's wife
is dead." Opening the door he retailed his experience to the wondering
friend. As they talked, along came a priest most strangely dressed for
this land. Approaching them he said--"Is this the house of Baryu?" At the
fisherman's acknowledgement--"Has a girl come here?... Dead! Deign to let
this foolish cleric hang eyes upon her." Baryu thought he would take his
turn at questions. "And you; whence from?" "From Fudarakusan in the
Nankai." "Get you hence, frantic interloper," broke in Baryu with grief
and anger. "Enough has this Baryu heard of Fudarakusan. Baryu must needs
observe his state as widower. The month must pass before he seeks a wife.
And more than half its days remain! But look." Mollified by the humble
attitude of the priest he went and raised the coverlet from the woman's
body. He uttered a cry of surprise. "Oya! Oya! She has disappeared. There
is naught here but a wooden image. Ma! Ma! what a curious figure--with
scroll and fish basket, just as the wife appeared at the beach. This is
what one reads of in books." He turned to the priest in wonder and as
seeking explanation. Said the latter with earnest and noble
emphasis--"Favoured has been this Baryu. The Kwannon of Fudarakusan of
Nankai has shown herself before his very eyes. For the reform of this
wicked people, to teach them the holy writing, she has condescended to
submit to the embraces of the fisherman. Let not Baryu think of other
marriage. For him has come the call to leave this world. Fail not to
obey." Baryu rushed to the door, to catch but a glimpse of the departing
form. All sign of the priest quickly faded. Baryu returned to the wooden
figure lying where once had reposed the body of the beautiful girl. It was
a most unsatisfactory substitute for the flesh and blood original. But
Baryu made the most of it. He took his vow. He shaved his head, becoming a
priest to recite and preach the sutra of the Lady Kwannon. Hence this
Kwannon is known as the Baryufu Kwannon--wife of Baryu the fisherman.
Hence she is called the Kwannon of the fish basket, in honour of the aid
she brought the people of this village and land.




CHAPTER XXII

THE RITES FOR O'IWA SAN


Iémo[u]n fared as badly at the hands of the Buddha as at those of the
Kami. Shu[u]den Osho[u], as guardian of the sacred image of the
Gyo[u]ran Kwannon, was a very great man indeed. After some delay the
deputation from Samoncho[u] was ushered into his presence, Iémon made
profound obeisance and explained the cause of their presence. The
visitations of O'Iwa to the district were causing the greatest public
commotion. Not as a matter of private interest, but of public utility
his interference was sought. If Iémon thought to abstract a copper
"cash" from the priestly treasury he made a gross mistake. Besides, the
individual who disturbs the public peace suffers severely from official
mediation, no matter what form this takes. Shu[u]den inquired minutely
as to the visit of the Daiho[u]-in, of which he seemed to have heard.
What information Iémon might have withheld, or minimised, or given a
different complexion, was cheerfully volunteered by others, who also
corrected and amplified any undue curtailing or ambiguity of their
spokesman. Shu[u]den listened to Iémon with a gravity and an expression
hovering between calculation and jeering comment. He turned from him to
the committee, giving great attention to those scholiasts on the text of
the orator. He gravely wagged his head in agreement with the rival
prelate, whose acumen he highly extolled. Memorial services were to be
provided for a year. It was, after all, merely a form of restitution to
the wronged lady. But also the wandering spirit of O'Iwa was to be
suitably confined. Here lay the difficulty. Recitation of the sutra for
seven continuous days; proper inhumation of the substitute beyond
possibility of disturbance, would surely lay a spell on the enraged
lady, and put an end to the curse of one dying an unworshipped spirit.
For the burial a bamboo was to be provided--of length one _shaku_ eight
_bu_ (one foot nine inches) between the joints.

With this notice Iémon and his companions withdrew. He was resigned to
the payment of the fifty _ryo[u]_ necessary for the memorial services
extending over the year. The inclusion in the bamboo was another affair.
The finding of such was about as easy as the fishing for black pearls.
He soon found that securing the substitute and securing the body of
O'Iwa San for proper inhumation were kindred problems. After looking
over all the bamboo which had drifted to Edo and was in the hands of the
world secular--and most of it at surprisingly cheap rates--the committee
was driven back on the religious world. They soon found that the article
in question was kept in stock only at the Gyo[u]ran Kwannondo[u].
Resorting to the priestly offices, Iémon felt convinced that the grave
salutation of the incumbent official--they directed him to the
treasury--concealed a derisive grin at his expense. He was sure of it
when he learned that this rare object could be had--for another fifty
_ryo[u]_. The temple gave no credit; but Suzuki, the usurer who was one
of the party, after some demur agreed to hand over the amount, which he
had just received from Akiyama Cho[u]zaémon, the service bounty of the
daughter O'Tsuru. With some reluctance the long nosed, long faced, long
limbed Kamimura went security for the repayment on their return to the
ward. With cheerful recklessness Iémon pledged the last chance of any
income from the pension and resources of Tamiya for the next three
years; so heavily was he in debt. Shu[u]den on his part lost no time.
With at least one member of the committee in attendance, to see that he
played fair, for seven days vigorously was the sutra intoned by the
loudest and most brazen of his subordinates, backed by the whole body of
priests. Day and night a priest would slip to the side altar, to invoke
the pity of the Buddha on the wandering spirit of the deceased lady in
few pithy but hasty words, and to spend the rest of his vigil in a
decent slumberous immobility.

The seven days accomplished, the procession formed. Six men in new
uniforms--provided by Iémon--made pretence of great difficulty in
carrying the long box (_nagamochi_). Four men carried the _sambo_, or
sacred tray of white wood, on which rested the section of bamboo wrapped
by the hands of Shu[u]den himself in the sacred roll of the sutra of
Kwannon. Officialdom of the ward was present. The citizens turned out
_en masse_. For long Yotsuya had not witnessed such a scene. Within its
precincts the _yashiki_ of the great nobles were conspicuously absent;
their long processions of spearman, _chu[u]gen_, _samurai_ and officials
were only to be witnessed at times on the highway which leaves Shinjuku
for the Ko[u]shu[u]kaido[u] and the alternate and then little used
Ashigarato[u]ge road. Arrived at Samoncho[u] the ground selected was
inspected by Shu[u]den. The bishop's eyebrows puckered in questioning
mien. "Here there are too many people. Is there no other place?" They
led him to another site. The wrinkle deepened to a frown--"Here there
are too many children. Their frolics and necessities are unseemly. These
would outrage the tender spirit. Is there no other place?" The committee
was nonplussed. Iémon was in terrible fear lest all his effort and
expenditure would go for naught but to swell Shu[u]den's cash roll. A
thought came into his mind. "There is no other open land, but the garden
of Tamiya is wide and secluded. The wall prevents public access." People
looked at him aghast. He was either mad with courage, or obstinate in
disbelief in the power of O'Iwa San so plainly manifested. Shu[u]den
paid no attention to that surprised whispering. "Deign to show the way
thither." Thus the procession took its course back to Teramachi and
through the gate of Tamiya. A spot was selected, just before the garden
gate. It was open to the salutation and vows of passers-by, yet could be
shut off from direct access toward house and public. At Shu[u]den's
order a hole was dug, just four _shaku_ (feet) in depth. The Osho[u]
began the recitation of the sutra. The priests stood by in vigilant
attention. As the last word reverberated on the bishop's lips they
seized the sutra wrapped bamboo, slipped it in the long box--bum! the
lock snapped. The congregation was tremendously impressed. For a decent
time Shu[u]den remained in prayer and meditation. "The charm is
complete. O'Iwa no longer wanders, to her own penance and the disaster
of men. Henceforth he who says she does so lies. Hearken to the words of
Shu[u]den. Admit none such to your company. Let not children make this
place a playground. Shu[u]den has given warning. Pollution surely
follows. Their habits are unseemly, an insult to the dead. Even as to
parents, those with infants on their backs are specifically to be
excluded." He tied a paper covered with Sanscrit characters to a bamboo
stick. This was placed on a white wood stake. On the stake he wrote
kindred words, converting it into the counterfeit of a _sotoba_. Neither
he nor any present knew what the words meant, or had care as to their
ignorance of this essential of religion. Then he and his train gathered
up their gowns and galloped out the gate, after practice and receipt of
grave courtesy, so much did temple differ from shrine in its contact
with secular life. The assembled multitude departed; much edified by the
day's proceedings, and with low comment to each other on the
dilapidation of Tamiya, its fall from the one time spruce and
flourishing state. "Introduce a spendthrift in the door, and the wealth
leaks from every crevice. The spirit of Tamiya Matazaémon must grieve at
this sight. But why did he bring in as _muko_ a stranger?"

Iémon could flatter himself on the efficacy of the divine
interposition. The public mind was quieted. Nothing more was heard of
O'Iwa San. Only the daily summons, on one pretext or another, to the
ward office troubled him. The _yakunin_ also made a practice of taking
in Tamiya en route to performance of their various missions. This he
knew was a practice as to men under observation. He went over his career
as known to Yotsuya. There was nothing in it to call for question.
Official censure does not rest its case on a ghost story. The famous
investigation of Echizen no Kami (O[u]oka) into the Yaeume case of
Yamada was matter of later days. Moreover, all his troubles were
lightened by the state of O'Hana, the devoted object of unwavering
affection. Ever since the Daiho[u]-in had mesmerized her, impressed his
will on her, the daily improvement could be marked. Now again she was
her normal self; sadly thin and worn in spirit, a woman tired out, but
yet the figure of O'Hana and in her right mind. To him she was the
beautiful tradition of the past and just as beautiful as ever in
actuality. Two weeks had passed since Shu[u]den's experiment. One night,
as the hour of the pig (9 P.M.) was striking, there came a knocking at
the door. O'Hana rose from her sewing. "Danna, Kamimura San would say a
word." Iémon made a gesture of annoyance. The long man had shadowed him,
ever since entering on the engagement of bail. He went to the door and
looked at his caller with amazement. Kamimura, his hair in confusion,
was stark naked except for his wife's under cloth--and she was almost a
dwarf. He stretched out a hand to Iémon, half in threat, half in
begging. "Iémon Uji, a word: condescend to grant this Goémon ten
_ryo[u]_ in silver, not in words. Suzuki the usurer has come on Goémon
as bail of Iémon, in the matter of the exorcism. To-day he stripped the
house of everything. Wife and children, hungry and almost naked, lie on
bare boards. When Goémon begged mercy, that he go to Tamiya, the
wretched fellow jeered. 'Tamiya? Tamiya has but _hibachi_ and three
mats; the clothes worn by himself and wife. The house and land of Tamiya
is but a reversion. Suzuki gets nothing at Tamiya but a lawsuit which
would not pay the office fees. Kamimura is rich; his house is well
supplied. One petition; and not only expenses, but the debt finds
payment. Hence Suzuki troubles not Tamiya.' With this off he went
deriding me. Deign the loan, Iémon San. Condescend at least the shelter
of clothes and food."

To the wretched fellow Iémon could make no reply. Ten _ryo[u]_!
Kamimura might as well have asked for ten thousand _ryo[u]_. In house
and land Iémon was secure. These belonged to the heirship of Tamiya as
long as the House maintained its status. The pension was long mortgaged.
The farms had disappeared. The trouble of Goémon pained him. He could
only refuse; palliating the refusal with vague promises as to the near
future. He would effect a loan. The debt of Suzuki repaid, all his goods
would be restored to Kamimura San. Goémon took this talk at its real
value. Shaking his fist he berated Iémon with violent words. "Ah! Shame
is brought to the House of Kamimura, wretchedness to his family--and by
this vile stranger. It is Iémon with his heartless wicked treatment of
O'Iwa San, who has wrought distress and ruin to the ward. For Goémon
there is neither food nor clothing? Wait! Time shall bring his vengeance
on Iémon and his House." Iémon would have detained him; sought in some
way to mollify him, at least get a hint as to how he purposed injury.
Goémon shook him off as one would a reptile. With a wild laugh he went
out naked as he was into the darkness.

He had no definite purpose in mind. However, as he passed the garden
gate of Tamiya his eye caught the factitious _sotoba_ standing white in
the fitful moonlight. He stood stock still; then clapped his hands in
mad joy and decision. Hastening to his home he sought out an old
battered mattock and a rusty spade. Soon he was back at the garden gate.
A blow and the bar fell. Goémon passed within. "She lies but four
_shaku_ deep. The task is quickly performed. None pass here at this
hour." The dirt flew under his nervous arms. Soon he had the box out on
the ground beside him. A peal of thunder; he must hasten, or stand a
ducking from the coming storm. He laughed. What had a naked man to fear
from getting wet? The clothes he wore would not spoil. Why did not man
dress in a towel, as after the bath; its use, to wipe the moisture from
the body. Now his eyes were fixed in curiosity on the bamboo staff
before him. The first few drops of the rainstorm fell on his bare
shoulders, but he disregarded them. "Naruhodo! How heavy it is! O'Iwa in
life hardly weighed more. Lady of Tamiya--show pity on this Goémon.
Iémon and O'Hana--those wicked voluptuaries--prosper and flourish, while
Goémon is brought to beggary and starvation. Deign to visit the wrath of
O'Iwa San on these vile wretches. Seize and kill them. Goémon sets O'Iwa
free." He seized the mattock. Raising it overhead he brought the edge
sharply down on the bamboo stake. At the moment there was a violent peal
of thunder rolling off into a crash and rattle. The landscape was lit up
by the vivid lightning. People uneasily turned over on their beds.

Shortly after dawn Iémon woke with a start. Don-don-don, don-don-don.
There was a tremendous rapping at his door. O'Hana could hear but a
whispered consultation going on without the _amado_. Iémon returned to
the room. His face was white; his step tottered. Hastily he donned an
outer robe. To her question he made scant reply, so agitated was he. His
one idea was to keep from her what he had just heard. In the garden he
found his wardsmen assembled. All were dumbfounded and aghast. They
looked at each other and then at the broken bamboo tube. Close by lay
the body of the man who had done the deed. Brains and blood had oozed
from the hole in the skull in which yet stuck the pointed end of the
mattock sunk deep within. Evidently the instrument had rebounded from
the resilient surface of the bamboo. A by-stander pointed to the tiny
fracture near the hard knot of the staff. It was a small thing, but
enough to destroy all the past labours. Iémon went up to look at the
body. "Why! 'Tis Goémon." To their questioning he told how Kamimura had
called on the previous night, his rage at the inability of Iémon to aid
him in distress. With hanging heads, eyes on the ground, and wagging
tongues, all departed to their homes. Later the body of Goémon was borne
to his house by neighbours. Iémon picked up the bamboo staff. Carrying
it within he placed it in a closet. It was as costly an object as the
house had ever held. He was in despair.

It was on that very day, at the seventh hour (3 P.M.), that O'Hana
heard a call at the door. "A request to make! A request to make!" She
recoiled from the sight presented. A beggar stood at the entrance of
Tamiya. A dirty mat wrapped around his body, feet and arms emerging from
bandages, making him like to some hideous insect with its carapace, his
face wrapped in a towel, the effects of leprosy were hideously
patent.--"What do you here? There is naught to be had. Pray depart at
once." The answer was in tones the very harshness of which seemed to
cause pain to the utterer--"The request is to Iémon Dono. Condescend to
notify him." With fearful glance O'Hana shrank within, Iémon noted her
nervous quivering. Promptly he was on his feet--"A beggar has frightened
Hana? Such are to be severely dealt with." He went to the entrance. "A
beggar, and such a fellow? How comes it entrance has been had to the
ward? There is nothing for you here. If you would escape the dogs and
bastinado, get you hence at once." The man did not stir from the spot on
which he stood. Slowly he opened the mat held round his body
(_komokaburi_), one of the coarse kind used to wrap round _saké_
barrels. He was clothed in rags glued together by the foul discharges of
his sores. He removed the towel from his face. The ghastly white and red
blotches, the livid scars of the leper, the head with patches of scurfy
hair ready to fall at a touch, startled even Iémon the priest. He would
not have touched this man, expelled him by force, for all the past
wealth of Tamiya. The intruder noted the effect produced.

"To such has the wrath of O'Iwa San brought this Cho[u]bei. Does not
Iémon, the one-time neighbour Kazuma, recognize Cho[u]bei? And yet all
comes through Iémon. Child, wife, means of life, all these have failed
Cho[u]bei. In the jail robbed of everything, degenerate in mind and
body, Cho[u]bei has found refuge at nights in the booths of street
vendors; on cold wet nights, even in the mouths of the filthy drains.
Fortunate is he when fine weather sends him to rest on the river banks.
To seek rest; not to find it. O'Iwa stands beside him. When eyelids
drowse Cho[u]bei is aroused, to find her face close glaring into his.
Beg and implore, yet pardon there is none. 'Cho[u]bei has a debt to pay
to Iwa. In life Cho[u]bei must repay by suffering; yet not what Iwa
suffered. Think not to rest.' Some support was found in a daughter, sold
in times past to the Yamadaya of Yoshiwara. There the child grew up to
become the great profit of the house. The influence of the Kashiku was
all powerful to secure entrance. For a night Cho[u]bei was to find food
and a bed. But that night came Kibei San. He killed the Kashiku--crushed
her out, as one would crush an insect. This Cho[u]bei nearly died; but
Kibei left him to the mercy of O'Iwa. Her mercy!" He would have thrown
out his arms in weary gesture of despair. The pain and effort were too
great. He moaned. "Last night Cho[u]bei sought relief. Of late years the
river has been spanned, for passers-by and solace of the human refuse.
Standing on Ryo[u]gokubashi the dark waters of the river called to
Cho[u]bei as they swept strongly by to the sea. A moment, and all would
be ended. About to leap hands were laid on Cho[u]bei's shoulders. He was
dragged back. Turning--lo! 'twas O'Iwa San. Another creature, still
fouler than she, with sloping eyelid, bald head, and savage look, stood
by. Said O'Iwa San--'And Cho[u]bei would end all--with luxury before his
eyes! Cho[u]bei dies not but with the consent of Iwa. Get you to
Yotsuya; to Iémon and Hana, living in luxury and Tamiya. Aid will not be
refused you.' And so she brought me here. Deign to hear the prayer of
Cho[u]bei. Allow him to die in Yotsuya, upon the _tatami_; not on the
bare earth, to be thrown on the moor for dogs to gnaw. Grant him burial
in temple ground."

He changed his theme; the feeble quivering hands clasped his belly.
"Ah! This pinching hunger. Double Cho[u]bei's suffering; of mind and
body. Apply for alms or food, and the leper is repulsed. See! Two
fingers remain on this hand. Count of the rest fills out the tale for
but one member. O'Hana San, condescend a rice ball for this Cho[u]bei.
You, at least, know not the pinch of hunger.... Ah! She still possesses
some of that beauty and charm for which Iémon has brought ruin upon
all." Before the horrible lascivious leer of this object O'Hana fled.
Left alone Iémon spoke. He had been thinking--"Cho[u]bei has spoken
well. From Iémon he is entitled to relief. Cho[u]bei shall die on his
mat. But in such shape nothing can be done. Get you hence. Buy clothing
fit to appear before men's eyes. In the bath wash that pus-laden body.
Then come to Iémon. Relief shall be granted Cho[u]bei." Wrapping a
_ryo[u]_ in paper he passed it to the leper. It was the last coin he
possessed. O'Hana now returned with five or six rice balls savoured with
salt. Fascinated, the two watched the horrible diseased stumps awkwardly
shoving the food into the toothless mouth, cramming it in, and breaking
it up so as not to lose the savour of a grain. "Until to-morrow," said
Cho[u]bei. He picked up his stick. In silence the man and woman watched
him. "Leaning on his bamboo staff he crawled away like some insect."
O'Hana looked inquiringly at Iémon. He turned away his head.

Through the dusk Cho[u]bei crawled across the Ryo[u]gokubashi. The
words of the woman O'Také had come true. He had a sense of being
followed. He turned at the sound of footsteps. At sight of a _samurai_
in deep hat, mechanically he stretched out hands and self in the
roadway, begging an alms. The man drew apart, passing him in disgust and
haste. Cho[u]bei went on. He had no aim. It was with surprise that he
found himself, as often of late, on the embankment of the North
Warigesui. He looked down on the foul place of O'Iwa's disappearance. "A
foul ending; but after all an end. One night! One night's sleep! Deign,
lady of Tamiya, to grant pardon and respite to Cho[u]bei. Just one hour
of sleep." Carefully he adjusted his mat. Painfully he stretched himself
out on it. "To die on the mat. Such was the word of Iémon." He felt his
rags. "It was well he agreed. Cho[u]bei had other means to force
compliance. Well, 'tis for later use." A continued rustling aroused him.
Some one was cautiously picking a way through the dry grass of the past
winter, was creeping toward him. He half rose. Seeing that concealment
was no longer possible, the man rushed on him. Cho[u]bei struggled to
his feet, as one to fight for life. "Life is dear. Why kill Cho[u]bei
the leper? Is he a test for some new sword? Deign to pardon. The flesh
of the leper is too rotten. It defiles the weapon. Cho[u]bei has been
the _samurai_; he knows.... Ah! Respite there is none. 'Tis Iémon! Iémon
of Tamiya would kill Cho[u]bei!" He shouted and coupled the names in his
despair. Fearful of discovery, of being overheard, Iémon did not delay.
The gleaming weapon descended. Standing over the body Iémon showed
uncertainty. He had some thought of search; even bent down over it. But
he could not touch those foul rags. His nicety of feeling, almost
womanlike--recoiled. Besides, what more had Iémon to do with the leper
Cho[u]bei. Their account was closed. Should he leave the body where it
was? Recognition might convey some danger, at least inconvenience. He
looked around for means to sink it in these waters, and yet not handle
its repulsiveness. A _sho[u]yu_ tub, old but fairly intact, lay upon the
bank. It caught his eye. He rolled it up to the corpse. Gingerly he
girdled the body of the dead man with his _tasuki_ (shoulder cord). Now
tight fast it clasped the roundness of the barrel. This he filled with
stones, drove in the head, and with a shove sent it and its burden into
the Warigesui. "That will hold him down. The rotten punk! Three days,
and none could recognize him." Then he set off at rapid pace for
Yotsuya.




CHAPTER XXIII

SANZUGAWA BRIDGELESS: THE FLOWERLESS ROAD TRAVERSED BY THE DEAD


It was the hour of the pig (9 P.M.) before Iémon reached the house in
Yotsuya. To his surprise he found the _amado_ still open on the garden.
Some one was lying face downward on the _ro[u]ka_. It was O'Hana. To his
alarmed inquiry as to what was wrong she answered in the voice of one
trying to suppress great pain. "This Hana knows not. Opening a closet to
get the spices used in preparing the meal, a rat sprang out. It
scratched the face of Hana. Truly the pain is very great." She groaned,
Iémon gently raised her. At the look on his face O'Hana said--"There is
a mirror in the toilet set (_kyo[u]dai_). Deign to get it for Hana." He
did not get it--this dower gift once of O'Iwa--but tried to soothe
her--"Let be: the wounds soon will heal. The pain will pass away." She
shoved him aside and ran to the toilet stand. She took the hand-mirror
to the solitary lamp lighting the room. Aghast she contemplated her
features. One side of the face was completely discoloured. It was a dark
red, almost black, with the mark of five fingers plainly visible, as if
a hand had struck her. No rat had made this wound. O'Hana leaned over,
her head resting almost on her knees. Iémon touched her shoulder--"Don't
mind it. Truly the pain will pass with dawn. Hana...." He drew back from
the scowling madness in the face raised to him--"Sa! Sa! Iémon! Iémon!
Easily did you get hold of all my property, to waste it on O'Hana. 'Twas
like grasping wet millet. Then, barbarous as you were, you sold me to
the vile life of a street harlot. Ah! Vengeance!" In fright Iémon
retreated. O'Hana, taking herself to be O'Iwa, all her madness had
returned. She sprang up. Screens were beaten and torn to pieces. With
the heavy mirror she turned on him, seeking vengeance for her imagined
wrongs. Iémon narrowly escaped injury as he dashed in to grapple with
her. He succeeded in dragging her away from the lamp. Thus did this wild
battle rage in the half dark room. The fictitious strength of the ill
woman gave out. He held her on the floor, as one subdued. As she
relapsed into a sleep, almost of unconsciousness, he ventured to release
her. Going to a closet he placed the mirror beside the bamboo stick;
both hidden away.

All night he watched over her. Wearied out, with day he sought an aid
readily given. The nurse, however, in alarm soon roused him. O'Hana was
raving madly in a high fever. The woman could not restrain her. Her
cries were terrible, but not more so than the speech from her
lips--"O'Iwa, pardon! With the drugs of Suian this Hana would palsy
O'Iwa's mind and body; poison the very springs of life, cut off all hope
of issue. Ah! Vain the love of a man. All is granted him; body and
goods. Iémon sells Hana for a street harlot. Out with him! Help!... Ah!
Kwaiba aids--in all his rottenness. How horrible he is--huge vacant eye
holes, the purple whitish flesh gnawed and eaten.... Ugh! He stinks!...
Nay! 'Tis not Kwaiba. 'Tis Cho[u]bei: Cho[u]bei the leper, who would
embrace this Hana. Iémon comes. There is murder in his eye--for Hana to
see, not Cho[u]bei. Away! Away!... Again, there she comes!" She grasped
the nurse's arm, and pointed to the just lighted _andon_ which barely
relieved the shadows of the darkening night; was it the woman's
imagination? By the light, dimly outlined; sat O'Iwa San. Her hair hung
down around face and body half turned aside. The bulging forehead, the
puffed eyelids, were not to be mistaken. The woman shook off the sick
girl's hand and fled the house. Iémon did not try to prevent her. He was
as one paralyzed. He, too, had seen, and was convinced.

To watch through the night was the task of the anxious and wearied man.
In the day a _yakunin_ had come, with formal notice to attend next day
the office of Katada Tatéwaki Dono. His lordship had an inquiry to make.
The summons was not to be disregarded, no matter what his own
exigencies. O'Hana had dropped into a cataleptic state. As the eighth
hour (1 A.M.) approached he thought to clear brain and body by the rest
of a few moments. His head had barely touched the pillow when sleep
followed. The bell of Gwansho[u]ji struck the hour. It roared and
reverberated through Tamiya. Iémon awoke; an oppression like suffocation
pervaded his whole body. Opening his eyes they stared into the wide
white flat face of O'Iwa. Her eyes were now alive, darting gleams of
fire deep from within the puffed and swollen lids. He felt her wild
disordered hair sweeping his face as she swayed a little, still
retaining her post and clutch on his bosom--"Iémon knows Iwa now! Hana
knows Iwa now! Sworn to seize and kill both for seven births--come! Now
it is that Iwa completes her vengeance." As she shook and pressed on him
he came gradually out of his sleep. With a shout he cast her backwards.
Springing up he grasped the sword at his pillow. Madly he dealt blow
after blow on the body before him. To the groans he replied by fresh
blows.

An uproar without called him to himself. Don--don--don, don, don, don.
There was knocking at the gate. Iémon hastily trimmed up the wick of the
lamp. He leaned over the body. O'Hana! The young man stooped over her,
leaning on the gory sword. Great drops of cold sweat stood out on his
forehead. A shout came from without. "In his lordship's name! Open, or
force will be used." Why had the summons for the day been anticipated?
The unhappy ravings of O'Hana flashed to his mind. Iémon no longer
reasoned. A cunning insane light was in his eyes. Softly he made his way
to the _amado_ fronting on the garden. No one was without. In the rain
and storm he might escape. Traversing the darkness he noted, however,
the man posted at the gate in the rear. Springing on the roof of the
shed he looked over into Teramachi. It was deserted. With the bloody
sword he hacked off the sharp points of the bamboo stakes. They now
aided his flight over the wall. He cast the weapon aside. In a few
minutes he disappeared in rapid flight down the street. When Katada
Tatéwaki, accompanied by his men, at last broke down the stout
resistance offered by the outer door of Tamiya he found the house empty,
except for the dead body of O'Hana, lying in its pool of blood. She was
still warm. He took it for mere murder, giving more urgent directions
for immediate pursuit. Methodically he searched the house, down to the
very rubbish pile. The seal of Tamiya was secured. This meant much. With
sceptical smile he handled the broken bamboo stick found in a closet. He
did not show the discovery to his men.

Where did Iémon go? The unhappy man himself could not have told what
happened in the intervening days. He came to consciousness in the
darkness of a spring night, just before the dawn. The stars were
beginning to pale in the East. The landscape had the livid eerie light
in which it is uncertain whether day or night is to be the issue. With
surprise Iémon looked around him; then shuddered. The stagnant waters of
Warigesui's filthy stream lay beneath him. He had found rest on the
bank, at the very place where Cho[u]bei had died under his hand.

    "The Sanzugawa--without hills or bridges;
     On highway traversed by the dead, flowers there are none."[38]

The _yama_ ([yama]) refers to Yamada Cho[u]bei; the _hashi_ ([hashi]) to
Takahashi Iémon; the _hana_ ([hana]) to O'Hana, the wife of Iémon. Such
was the then interpretation of the old poem.

Iémon could go no further. His course was run. He knew it; but how end
life? At heart he was an arrant coward. Determined to cut belly he drew
the dagger he had kept with him. A shudder went through him at sight of
the steel. Ah! Better the green slime of the waters below. He thrust the
blade back into its scabbard. Moodily standing and gazing down, he gave
an idle kick to a stone near by. Dislodged, it swayed, then rolled
heavily down the bank, to plunge noisily into the stream, disturb its
noisome depths. The effect was surprising. Following its course with his
eye Iémon suddenly gave a yell of horror. Eyes starting from his head,
arms raised high, he bent toward the stream. Hair standing on end he
watched the hideous object rise to the surface. The face of Cho[u]bei,
purple and bloated, the lips half gnawed and open in a fiendish grin,
looked up at him. Down came the arms, and Iémon put hands over eyes to
shut out the fearful vision. A horrid curiosity drove him again to view
it. Was he mad? This time the barrel in its slow revolution brought to
view the wide flat face, the bulging brow and heavy lids, the tangled,
disordered hair of the drowned O'Iwa. Scream after scream of the now
frantic wretch rang in the air. These waters! Seek death there! No! No!
A thousand times--No! He turned to flee the place, but his legs refused
the service. With fell purpose he ripped the blade from its scabbard,
tore open his clothes to give the deadly thrust. As he raised the dagger
invisible hands seized his arm. When he would release it, the other arm
was seized. Everywhere these hands held him fast. He raged, tore,
struggled madly to elude their grasp. Then, overcome, he fainted.

Katada Tatéwaki from the top of the bank had been watching the
struggle of his men. He came forward and looked down at the bound and
helpless creature. "'Tis he: in very fact." On order a bamboo pole was
fetched, and run between the bound hands and feet. Thus like some beast
was Iémon conveyed to the nearest ward office. The formalities were few
and soon over. To avoid chance of repetition of the scene they conveyed
him as he was. Thus began the brutal progress across Edo in full
daylight. People turned and stared after this escort of the man-beast.
At a distance they took the burden as some savage bear, or perhaps one
of those reputed "_tanuki_" so noxious in their pranks on humankind.
Come closer it was seen to be a man. Any mad struggle to get free was
treated to spear pricks applied with no great nicety beyond the
avoidance of serious injury. Violent as were his struggles at times, it
is doubtful if they could have walked him the long distance. For the
days of his flight he had never rested; nor had these men in his
pursuit. Yet he was unexpected game. The Yotsuya affair was taking a
widening sweep. Tamiya Yoémon and Kondo[u] Rokuro[u]bei were under
examination. The death of a girl O'Haru at the brothel of Toémon of
Honjo[u] had unexpected effects. In the investigation which followed one
of the women, O'Také, had made full confession. The pedlar Mobei had
never left the house of Toémon; never escaped from the hospitality of
O'Matsu. His goods had aroused her cupidity. The man died by poison, and
was buried in the garden of Toémon's house. O'Haru knew of the deed.
This knowledge was the girl's destruction. The wife and her substitute
O'Kin hated O'Haru. Some remains of a first good looks, her youth, gave
her power with the master of the house. The two women worked on his
fears to gain consent for her destruction. A charge easily was trumped
up, and she was dragged off to the cell of punishment. Under the hands
of the wife and O'Kin she suffered so that she died in three days, not
without letting her mate O'Také into the secret. Promptly the Honjo[u]
police were at work; not more prompt than was the woman O'Kin to
disappear from Edo, almost a confession in itself. The rosary, found in
the hands of the rector of the Reiganji, was easily traced through
different mediators straight to O'Matsu herself. The man Toémon held
out, and died under the torture. The woman confessed; and in her
confession was comprehended the full story of O'Iwa's connection with
Toémon's house. Of her no more need be said. She rotted and died in the
jail. The girls were scattered to kindred houses. Two of the women,
hunting their pray on Warigesui toward the _yashiki_ quarter, had
witnessed the murder of Cho[u]bei three nights before. The police had
gone to secure the body. Tatéwaki Dono was notified and had accompanied
them. To the surprise of all Iémon, then the object of earnest search,
was found on the spot.

The affair kept on spreading--to the very source of all these troubles.
Katada Tatéwaki in the course of procedure had transmitted the Tamiya
case to the jurisdiction of the _machibugyo[u]_ of the North district of
Edo town, Homma Iga no Kami. With greatest interest the two men in
company poured over the innumerable documents now piling up in the case.
Old Tamiya Yoémon proved easy game. He readily confessed all he knew.
This brought in many witnesses from the wardsmen. It was not exactly
what was wanted. The evidence was mostly mere hearsay and conjecture. In
those days such testimony had a value not far below that of direct
statement. All pointed the way to the real criminal, who after all was
the star witness. Against Yoémon at first there was but little. However,
in his rage against Iémon and Kondo[u] Rokuro[u]bei--Akiyama was out of
his reach--his tongue was too long. The faces of the magistrates grew
serious as his connection with the money lender Suzuki was made plain. A
_samurai_ loaning money on interest! and pressing men to ruin for
payment!! The stingy avaricious Yoémon appeared behind the usurer--until
in time his own heavy losses had made him a borrower, and placed him in
the hands of his once partner. Yoémon, together with the conspirators,
was not allowed to participate in the forced restitution made by Suzuki.
Nevertheless, at the time no great severity was shown the old man. He
was remanded to the custody of his bail, to be kept confined to one room
in the house.

The same leniency was shown toward Rokuro[u]bei. When he showed a
disposition to be recalcitrant, to equivocate, Homma gave sign to the
_do[u]shin_. Quickly the scourgers came forward with their fearful
instrument, the _madaké_. Made of bamboo split into long narrow strips,
these tightly wrapped in twisted hempen cord to the thickness of a _sun_
(inch), with the convenient leverage of a couple of _shaku_ (feet), the
mere sight brought Kondo[u] to terms. As he entered he had seen them
lead away a _heimin_ (commoner) who had undergone the punishment. The
man's back, a mass of bruised and bleeding flesh, was vivid to mind. At
once he prostrated himself; made full confession. At last they were at
the source. Kondo[u] was a witness of the fact. He could and did tell of
the inception and progress of the whole plot against O'Iwa San, the
source of untold woe to Yotsuya. His story covered the period from the
entrance of Iémon into the ward up to the discovery of the body of
Kamimura Goémon. The rôle played by Kazaguruma Cho[u]bei was in part
dark to him. Of the disposition of O'Iwa to the Honjo[u] master of the
_Yo[u]taka_ he pleaded ignorance. Tatéwaki Dono smiled as he counselled
indulgence on this point. He knew.

Kondo[u], however, was sent back to the jail. He was unquestionably a
principal. At last it was the turn of Iémon. The weeks had passed. The
body had been carefully nursed back to vigour. The mind was in
lamentable state. The ill-meant efforts of the jail authorities, the
strengthening of the criminal in order better to endure the torture to
the confession point, were somewhat baffled by the nightly visions of
the wretched man. The two hags, O'Iwa and O'Mino; Cho[u]bei in his final
stage of purple bloatedness; these were his nightly companions, to
torment and harass him. Sleep! If he could but close his eyes to shut
out these horrors! Instead they became more vivid. The jailors put him
at the farthest corner of their ample premises. His fellow prisoners,
such as were allowed daily exit to the yard, visited him with blows and
foul insults for the disturbance he created in the night. But he was
cunning withal. Trapped as he was, in his lucid moments he realized that
there could be but little against him. O'Iwa? Not even in Tokugawa times
was the supernatural cause of prosecution except at the hands of the
vulgar. Nor in those days, any more than in these of Taisho[u] _nengo_,
was a wife legally protected against abuse of husband or parents-in-law.
As for Cho[u]bei--he was dead. His own presence on the scene was no
evidence against him as murderer. His only misgivings on that point lay
in the confusion of mind as to the few days then covered. But who would
blame a _samurai_ for testing his blade on a beggar? What were beggars
for? He knew nothing of the evidence given by Yoémon and Kondo[u]; of
the vile proof in the hands of Katada Dono. He had wholly forgotten the
nurse who had listened to the wild ravings of O'Hana in her illness,
broken sentences bearing so heavily and dove-tailing so nicely into the
completed case. Owing to this woman Tatéwaki Dono had not waited the
appearance of Iémon at morning. Iémon also left out of account the
characters of the two men before whom he appeared. Iga no Kami sat as
judge in the case. Close beside him, a little in the rear, sat Katada
Tatéwaki, in whose jurisdiction the case had originated, and who was
familiar with every stage. The four _do[u]shin_ sat to one side and the
other of these two men.

Homma and Katada were typical of their caste. Cold, callous, cruel,
devoted rigidly to the formulæ; of the _samurai_ code, with strange
exceptions granted to the virtues required of the common people--filial
conduct and unswerving obedience to a superior--they were not men likely
to regard with favour this intruder into their class. The name of
_samurai_ had been brought into contempt. Hence the serious character of
the offence, the necessity of severest scrutiny. To the valued
suggestion of Tatéwaki, Iga no Kami nodded assent. Iémon thought of
nothing but the murder of Cho[u]bei, the abuse of his wife O'Iwa, the
conspiracy against her life and honour. The first question paralyzed his
defence. Was he not the son of Takahashi Daihachiro[u]? The whole
terrible vista of the consequences of avowal appeared before him, once
himself a _do[u]shin_ and familiar with legal procedure. The family had
suffered _kaieki_ (deprivation of rights). It had been degraded from the
caste. Properly speaking Iémon was an intruder into the _samurai_ class.
He was an impostor. His offence was against the suzerain lord, the
Sho[u]gun. All the terrible penalties of treason hung over him. Tatéwaki
had been quick to note the opportunity to take this case out of the
category of offence by a _samurai_. Iémon was a plebeian and a
charlatan. He had insulted Government. At the stumbling denial quick
order was given. A _yakunin_ seized the rope and dragged down the head
of Iémon. Others held him at the sides, to maintain the body rigid.
Stout fellows, the pick of the jailors, came forward. With ferocious
regularity the blows fell. Welts at once appeared. Soon the blood was
trickling from the torn skin. There was no sign to mitigate the severity
of the infliction. When at the seventieth blow the body collapsed in a
faint the wretched man was a terrible sight. The attendants of the jail,
witnesses of the full punishment of double the number of stripes, had
rarely seen such severity exercised. The jailors hated this smooth
fellow, this disturber of their peace. They kept a jail, not a madhouse.
Their superiors showed no sign of the mercy of renewed questioning.
Hence they would change the mad nightly ravings to the subdued groans of
the punished.

The days passed and his body had healed, though movement caused pain
and distress. Brought again before the judges at the very sight of the
scourges he screamed out confession. Questioned as to the conspiracy
against the caste, his fraudulent attempt to consummate marriage with a
_samurai_ woman--the actual fact or legality of it was ignored--his
ill-treatment and sale of her; all these in terror he denied. Once he
had looked upon banishment from Edo as the limit of his punishment. Now
decapitation would be a merciful end. He strove to secure the favour of
a quick and painless death. Again he was beaten almost to a jelly. He
clung to his denial, so important was the issue. At the next appearance
he was seized and dragged to a post fixed in the ground not far from the
judge's seat. His knees were pressed down on the edges of the triangular
bars. These formed a sort of grid, the edges of the bars being just
enough blunted to avoid cutting the skin. None of the pain was spared,
yet the prisoner remained fit for early future torture. The granite
slabs were then piled on his knees. Each one weighed thirteen _kwan_
(107 lbs.). As the fifth slab was placed on the body of Iémon, the flesh
assumed a reddish tint from the impeded circulation. Froth stained his
mouth, mucus ran from his nose. A sixth, a seventh stone, were placed.
"How now! How now!" The men pressed heavily on the stones. A _do[u]shin_
bent over him, listening and waiting for sign of the important
confession. The criminal was the one important witness of Tokugawa penal
law. Without confession he was innocent beyond all other proof. As the
eighth stone was placed Iémon began to vomit blood. The doctor raised
his hand. The feet were showing signs of blackness, which rapidly spread
upward. The man was in a dead faint. No confession had been secured.

Perhaps the examination was thus conducted out of some severity. Days
passed. Whether or not the report of the physician was unfavourable,
influenced by some means Homma had fear the man might die before a
public retribution was secured. When Iémon again was dragged before his
judges he had a terrible object lesson before him. A man was undergoing
the torture of the lobster. Hands drawn up behind to the shoulders, the
feet tightly bound across the chest, he was propped up on a mat.
Properly conducted this "effort to persuade" took place in the jail.
Homma wished to try the effect of anticipation on Iémon. The prisoner
looked quickly at the man under torture, then hung down his head. His
lips were twitching with uncertainty. Homma struck hard--"Why deny the
plain fact? Is justice so ignorant of the doings and whereabouts of a
scamp. Kichitaro[u], or Kazuma the diviner, as he called himself,
murders Cho[u]bei the pimp; a deed carried out before witnesses." A
_do[u]shin_ placed the document of the confession of the whores so that
Iémon had no difficulty in ascertaining its title. "And why? Because of
the agreement with Cho[u]bei to sell the woman he dared to call his
wife. The proof? The seal of Tamiya, the document itself." At last Iémon
looked up. The _do[u]shin_ placed under his eyes the fatal contract with
Cho[u]bei--agreement of exchange of the body of the woman in return for
five _ryo[u]_ duly received. It had been recovered from the dead pimp's
corpse. Carefully wrapped in oiled paper, Cho[u]bei had carried it--sewn
in what he called his dress. Iémon unwilling to recognize past services,
Cho[u]bei was sure to find it useful. Truly Iémon was young and
impatient, and Cho[u]bei was double his age. With bitterness the
survivor recognized this primal fact.

Iémon's eyes wandered from the paper to the thief under torture. The
dark green of the body was rapidly changing. The doctor present gave a
quick frightened sign. Skilful hands at once cast loose the bonds. Over
toppled the body. Iémon noted the white, almost livid, colour of death.
Restoratives were applied. All were busied with bringing the man back to
life. Then he was carried off, expression so unlike that of a human
being that the less hardened shuddered. Said Homma--"No confession yet?"
He raised his hand to make a sign. Iémon knew the quickness of response.
He almost screamed his appeal for further respite. The Law had
triumphed. As Iémon put his thumb seal to the confession of guilt to
insolence (_futodoki_) the magistrates rose and disappeared.
"Futodoki"--they and he knew that it meant the death sentence.[39]

Judgment was not delayed. The next day Homma, with Katada and an officer
of the Sho[u]gun's household present, gave sentence. Yoémon and
Rokuro[u]bei glared hate at Iémon who squatted with head bent to the
ground. The sword--that now was his only hope. The first words of Homma
showed that no mercy was to be dealt out in this case. Suzuki the
plebeian merely suffered stripes and banishment from Edo. He had to make
restitution to the amount of his property--such as was left after paying
the huge fine to Government. Tamiya Yoémon and Kondo[u] Rokuro[u]bei
underwent degradation from the caste. There was no disposition to
overlook the offence of usury. Beggary was to be the portion of Yoémon,
the destitution of the outcast. For some years the senile old man, the
virago of a woman once the wife of Kondo[u] Rokuro[u]bei, were stationed
at the Nio[u]mon, to attract and amuse the worshippers passing up to the
great temple of the Asakusa Kwannon. Not for long could the woman hold
her tongue. Abuse passed with the sun's height to blows, and the
by-standers had to interfere and rescue the old man from the severe
beating. It was to the profit, rather than disadvantage, of the temple.
The pair were an added attraction. The priests left interference to
those at hand. Then the old man disappeared; to ornament the highway
with his corpse, or be cast on the moor, food for dogs and crows. Such
probably was the end of Tamiya Yoémon. The woman had not been seen for
some months. Her abilities as scold had attracted those qualified to
judge; her transfer to the position of bawd in a low-class house of the
neighbouring Yoshiwara soon followed.

Kondo[u] Rokuro[u]bei fared tolerably well, considering his deserts.
His confession had been a great aid in unravelling the case. He was not
sentenced to cut belly. Degraded he heard with dismay the sentence of
deportation and exile to the far distant island of Sado. At this savage
place, subject to the hell of a Siberian winter and the intense heats of
the summer, the once pampered man lived out his last days, few and evil.
He who had passed the time idling with tea-cup, or _go_, or flower
arrangement, and taking enjoyment in the freshness and coolness of his
garden at the Yotsuyazaka, at fifty years now tried to lead the hard and
dangerous life of the wild fishing population among whom he was
unceremoniously cast. Such life was soon forbidden him. He was but in
the road. Then he did such clerical duties as the village at times
needed. A wife even was provided for him. The final blow was a palsy,
cutting off all effort at making a livelihood. Beatings now took the
place of food. The villagers laughed when they heard of the old man's
fall from a cliff. They, too, would have acted as had the brothers of
O'Nabé (stew pan). They took the word for the deed; and at the cliff
foot near Negai they erected a wooden shrine to propitiate the spirit of
"Jiya Rokuro[u]."

The day of execution had come. When sentenced, bound as he was Iémon
struggled forward to plead for mercy, respite from the barbarous
punishment to be inflicted on the traitor. His reward was the cangue and
bamboo saw--_nokogirihiki_; failing death by this, he was to be
crucified. The attendants fell on him. Kicks and blows had little effect
on the man frantic with terror. He almost reached the _ro[u]ka_ at which
sat Homma. Then madly struggling he was carried off to the jail. Said a
_do[u]shin_--"His antics in the cangue will find small scope." The last
clause of the sentence was due to the notorious unwillingness of any
passer-by to give a cut. The punishment had lapsed since the days of the
third Sho[u]gun, and was no more successful in Iémon's case. Placed in
the cangue at the execution ground of Shinagawa a cut was made in each
side of his neck. Smeared with blood the bamboo saw was placed on the
cangue in inviting proximity to the head. For five hours people passed,
with curious glances, but no movement to release the criminal. An Eta
(outcast) butcher sidled up. The guards watched him with curiosity.
Picking up the saw he made one pass. At the yell given by Iémon he
dropped the implement and fled in terror, amid the laughter of guards
and by-standers. Toward the hour of the sheep (1 P.M.) a _yoriki_ with
his _do[u]shin_ appeared. On signal the cangue was removed. Inert limbs
feebly twitching Iémon was bound tight to the double cross, his legs and
arms stretched wide apart. This was raised, and again the hours passed
in miserable waiting for a death which seemed to recede. If
unconsciousness threatened he was given vinegar to drink as restorative.
His fevered lips eagerly sought the fluid and prolonged his torture. In
the spring light the days were long. As the sun was about to set the
officer gave command. A _do[u]shin_ came forward to the cross and made a
sign. A guard thrust his spear upward into the belly of Iémon. The limbs
made a movement, as in attempt to be drawn up. A guard on the other side
in turn made a thrust. Others followed. For some moments they continued
their sport, the reward of long waiting. The man was not yet dead.
Impatient the _do[u]shin_ gave the shaft of a spear a violent upward
thrust. Its point appeared through the left shoulder. The head fell
forward on the breast and hung limp. Iémon was dead.

       *       *       *       *       *

These events could not be let pass without notice from either the pious
or the timorous. Kyo[u]ho[u] 2nd year 2nd month 22nd day (3rd April,
1717) the Inari shrine built to propitiate the fearful Lady of Tamiya
was opened to worship with due ceremonies. It had been erected on the
ground of the house once occupied by Matazaémon, facing on Teramachi and
on the narrow street paralleling Samoncho[u] to the East. It was almost
opposite the entrance to the Sho[u]gwanji. At the family temple, the
Myo[u]gyo[u]ji, on the Samégabashi side, a grave and stela was set up.
With time, however, the opposition made itself felt. It was asserted
that the Lady O'Iwa still walked the ward, inflicting pains and
penalties on the inhabitants thereof. Triumphant reference was made to
recent public disasters--of plague, pestilence, famine, and tax levies.
The shrine was invitation for her presence. People had grown indifferent
as the new paint grew old, then shabby on the once famous _miya_.
Success lay with the opposition, and abolition of shrine and grave was
easily enforced. It was but for a time. The ward was either equally, or
more, unfortunate without the protection of its tutelary Inari shrine.
Just when it was re-established cannot be stated, but in the late
eighteenth century it was most flourishing. It was a favourite resort of
_samurai_ women, seeking consolation for unfaithful or brutal conduct of
their husbands, and strength in the reputation for chastity of the
famous Lady of Tamiya. In 1825 the third Kikugoro[u] made Yotsuya famous
by his presentation of the "Yotsuya Kwaidan" as written for the stage by
Tsuruya Namboku (Katsu Byo[u]zo[u]). In the first years of the Meiji
restoration period Shunkintei Ryuo[u], the famous story-teller, heralded
its renown in the Shin Yoshiwara. O'Iwa San became a feature of the
Konharuko[u] fête of that quarter. A grave was again erected to her at
the Myo[u]gyo[u]ji. As she had no _kaimyo[u]_, or posthumous name, the
rector of the temple gave her that of "Tokusho[u]-In Myo[u]nen Hisho[u]
Daishi," which can be interpreted--"She, pleasing of disposition and
earnest in prayer; a woman of greatest brilliance." Let the reader not
judge this composition harshly; or its truth.

The editor to the reproduction[40] of Ryuo[u]'s story speaks of his
difficulties. Placed in his hand for judgment he saw at once the power
of the tale. But--how avoid incurring the divine anger of the Yotsuya
Inari; how avoid being charged with the divine punishment? This question
was solved by the publisher assuming the burden of both inflictions;
under the spur of what _he_ regarded as publication in inferior and
untrue form. He answered these questions with a laugh--"Afraid? Not so:
I, too, am human. Though the unusual is an object, yet I would not
rejoice at incurring the divine anger by publishing what should not be
published. Though the divine anger be incurred by publishing the Yotsuya
Kwaidan, and the divine punishment be inflicted, yet who would not
gladden the eyes and ears of the land? Hence in haste the true record is
to be printed; owing to emission of unfounded stories. The true record
being put forth, the people profit by it. How then is the divine wrath
incurred by publication? Certainly not: the protection of the divine one
is secured." The editor trusted in his argument; as does the present
scribe.

More than once the remark has been heard as to these shrines of
Nippon--"Their temples? Those dirty, shabby places, without architecture
or interest, the haunts of snotty, ragged children?" The sun-helmeted
gentleman and lady, or collection of their kind, rush them by in haughty
contempt, and with some ridicule and ridiculous comment. Good Sir and
Madame, you are passing history on the road. At this Kwo[u]gwanji, in
its rather shabby guest hall, Kusonoki Masashige and his devoted
followers spoke their last defiance and then cut belly. Kobé? It is
noted as a place to take ship, and not be too long in doing so. This
other, barely a mile from the To[u]kyo[u]-Yokohama railway, is
contemporary record of Nitta Yoshioka, who carved his bloody protest on
the Ashikaga before he killed himself in the trap set by their treachery
at this spot. Here behind the Ko[u]raiji near Oiso is a very shabby and
tiny shrine nestled at the foot of the cliff. This had better be
avoided. It is dedicated to the smallpox god. But more than history is
neglected in the indifference and contempt shown these minor _miya_. A
vein of thought inwoven into the minds of this strange people is
instanced by this modest shrine of the Tamiya Inari. Wandering along the
amusement quarter of some great city, a theatre is seen with a _torii_
gorgeous in its red paint standing before the entrance. Within this
entrance is a small shrine and a box for the practical offerings of cash
or commodities. The theatre is decorated inside and outside with flags
as for a festival (_matsuri_). Such is actually in progress. The
representation is that of the Yotsuya Kwaidan. From manager and actor
(even in the presentation of the figured screen of the moving picture)
the malevolence of the O'Iwa Inari--the Fox-witched O'Iwa--is to be
averted. Hence all the signs of worship as at her very shrine; hence the
unwillingness of author or publisher to handle the story, at least in
its full form. This is but a remnant of the fear of "black magic" still
found and practised in Nippon. On the beach at Kamakura at times can be
found straw chaplets with gaudy cloth attached to the centre; a copper
coin, and rice offering are accompaniments. Or such will be found at the
crossroads of town or village, or on the Yokohama Bluff. Or in times of
epidemic in numbers they are laid on the wayside shrine of the god of
measles or other disease. The latter disposition conveys its own
warning; the others are _majinai_ or charms by which it is hoped to
transfer the disease to some other child, thus insuring the cure of the
first sufferer. The coin has been rubbed on the body of the little
patient. Dogs usually dispose of the food offering; and passing children
are only too likely to pick up the nefarious coin. The road cleaner
comes along at his rare intervals and sweeps the chaplet into the hole
for refuse. It is to be regretted that the ignorance and malevolence
indicated by these charms cannot as easily be gathered in and disposed
of. With these remarks the Yotsuya Kwaidan and its tale of ill-fortune
is brought to an end.

      YOKOHAMA,
  5th June-4th July,
        1916.

FINIS




APPENDICES

A


[In printed copies of the _gidayu_ the characters are to be
distinguished by their theme, only the term _kotoba_ is used to mark a
speaker. The shading into descriptive writing is at times vague. In the
present translation the characters are indicated. The original figures
in most _gidayu_ collections. Cf., "Gidayu Hyakuban," p. 271.]

The Gidayu:

Tsuruya Namboku was a writer of drama. Many are the persons called
Namboku. The three preceding generations were actors who played in
buffoon parts. In the fourth generation for the first time was taken up
the literary work of play-writing. The Namboku in the fourth generation,
Yo[u]myo[u] Genzo[u], later known as Inosuké, was born at
Motohamacho[u]. The father carried on the business of _katatsuki_ dyer,
(handling the cloth to be more or less gaily patterned). Anei 4th year
(1775), entering at the Kanai Sansho[u] no Mon he (_Yo[u]myo[u]_) took
the name of Katsu Byo[u]zo[u]. Later he received the name of Nan Tsuruya
Boku. When he became a playwright he was about fifty years old. His
plays are most ingenious, and are very numerous. Among them are the
"Osome Hisomatsu," "Iro-yomi-uri," "Sumidagawa Hana Gosho[u]," "Yotsuya
Kwaidan." In the playhouse they are known (collectively) as the "Namboku
Mono."


IÉMON SUMIKA NO DAN

(Scene in the house of Iémon)

Now to present it:--Already on that day--ko[u], ko[u]--the bell of
sunset had issued its call. In the hedges were heard sounds of the
swarms of insects. Still more lonely was the deserted mansion. O'Iwa,
disturbed, anxious, when was her countenance to be open, her breast
cleared of its darkness? She brought forth the _andon_; took out the
sulphured slivers of wood from the box holding steel, flint, and tinder.
In the depths of her husband's mind no flowers bloomed. She thought it
was her woman's temperament that made her brood. In her anxiety she gave
expression to her gloom:

_O'Iwa_--"Truly as 'tis said, it is a fleeting world; the flowing of
water the future of men. Before this I performed the service of the
inner apartments of the Hosokawa House. The marriage! Connected in
thought with Iémon Dono the honoured dismissal was requested, that I
should become a bride. Without fortune is that Inosuké, heir of the
master, such object of delight to bring him to maturity. In the end all
affection is absent. Nerve-racked from birth, with the pains of
child-birth, the blood clot, such sickness has seized upon me. Then
suddenly--one without a home, shorn of all ornament. Overcome completely
by the struggle, effort and end have culminated. Parent and child,
husband and wife, these (relations) master this self. Detested is the
fleeting world, gloomy one's existence."

As she pondered, unbidden the tears mingled with her depression. Without
restraint, gradually rising-rising-rising, mounted the flow of blood:

_O'Iwa_--"Ah! Ah! Again the ever-present disease shows itself. Deign--a
remedy! Oh! Oh! That! That! That same remedy of aforetime, stirred and
mingled with pure water. Two sips, three sips; if one drinks poison--one
becomes divine; life comes to an end, but pity is aroused."

The curtain before the dressing room was gently raised. Without speaking
Gombei seated himself close to O'Iwa.

"Eh! Who is that? Iya! No one is announced. Hana, I say! Hana, I say!
Oh! 'Tis he--of all men! Gombei San, has he come again? Vengeance is
satisfied, no longer exists."

As she would depart he held her sleeve to stop her.

_Gombei_--"Ah! Ah! I say--please wait. A little while ago, at Iémon's
coughing and clearing his throat, I was frightened away. Trembling, at
that time I went round to the rear. Thinking him really absent, with
stealth I have entered. The motive of a man lies at the bottom of the
heart. Just think to grant me a little affection. Alas! Ma! Submitting
it is deigned to hear what I have to say. Heigh! A woman like this, her
whole mind on Iémon, she would be the chaste wife. But the affections of
Iémon are elsewhere, far distant. Ya! Hoi! Hoi! Hoi! To fly! Ho! Ho! Ho!
Ho! Ho! Oh! Moreover the disposition of Gombei is not wicked. He seeks
to be the husband. Other purpose there is none. Condescend to be easy in
mind."

But his words carry no weight. The face of O'Iwa in the light has a
glare.

_Gombei_--"As usual: Ma! One deeply distrustful. Iya! These matters,
though in thought, are not to be put in words. The state of affairs is
too urgent to be put into words. Sa! But I hear you say--'Iémon probably
goes to Hachiman. Groundless all these censures.' Do you really believe
this? The intrigue is with the only daughter of Okumura Kinai, by name
Koúmé. She is indeed a beauty; whether one regard the shape of her face,
her manners, or the carriage of her loins as if the willow of spring.
The intimacy with Iémon could go no further. The proof spoken of is
here. This letter--the sealed envelope: it fell from the sleeve of
Iémon. Stealthily I picked it up, by accident. Now then! Whereabouts is
it? A lengthy thing--Sa! Let's see what's in it. The coquettishness of
the sentences! But let's see what she does say. Eh! What's that? 'The
night is source of pleasure. Great the pleasure at sight of you. With
compliments.' Assuredly there can be no mistake, when she talks this
way--'The day comes. Soon we will be husband and wife; morning and night
to be at your service. With compliments.'[41]--'Thus are the gods
invoked. With compliments.' Eh! What's this? 'When distant from your
side but for a moment, painful Time's course. Place this signature next
your very person (_hadaka_).'--'To-night--come quickly; your advent is
awaited. With compliments.' What a miserable creature is this! Is she
not? But there's still more. 'O'Iwa Sama and matters with her, this is a
punishment due to offence in a previous existence. Condescend to be
relieved in mind. Be sure thus to view it. The spiteful brush (pen)
stops. With compliments.'--'It is hard (my lot); very hard. With
compliments.'--'The honoured master comes; the ever-present desire.' How
now, O'Iwa Sama? Sa! Is there no outbreak as to this? The occasion is no
pleasing one. Is there no harsh remark forthcoming as to one who holds
illicit intercourse with the husband of another? Eh! You are a woman of
marvellous patience! Oh! Oh! Oh! Oh! At all events say what you think.
'As yet in this matter, as yet in this affair, you are certain of
nothing.' Is that it? That Koúmé and her mother plot together. Eh; but
she has a beautiful face! And you--you are bloated, eyes wide distended,
one side of the face caved in, the hair of the head all fallen out.
That--and that--how describe the ugliness of your face! The affection of
Iémon has worn out. Ah! What is the name of that poisonous drug, begged
of Suian until secured? That, too, has been learned. Oh! Fearful,
fearful, fearful! This is to act as one without care. Life is not
something which lasts forever. Send from this house dismissal to Iémon,
the act of separation. This the finality! Surely the intrigue is proved.
Mere thought, easily exhausted, is to no purpose. Make up your mind;
express your feelings. At all events your reputation is preserved. Act
and decide as one indifferent. More and more have in mind the _susuki_
of Masuo. Deign to yield. Do this--just this--O'Iwa Dono!"

_O'Iwa_--"No! and always, No! Firm the stand taken. In no way is this
to be endured--to be endured. To hate a person is unreasonable; 'tis
unjust. But--the embracing arms, the closely clinging, this is to act
the lover."

With fingertips she thrust him off. Angry the tears; her voice trembled.

_O'Iwa_--"Ya! 'A woman, and the object of contempt; one treated by her
lord with rudeness beyond measure. The husband has become wearied.
Here's the proof. Are you a woman lacking sense?' One so unmeasurably
rude--out with you! One's whole frame vibrates with passion. At one's
very feet, the fact is made plain. Quick--away with you! Delay--and this
shall be the guerdon."

With violence she drew the dagger of Kosuké. Gombei, wicked as he was,
weakened forthwith.

_Gombei_--"Eh! Treated thus one's purpose is brought to naught. Listen
now to reason, self-willed as you are. A little while, and it will not
be the time for a snarling face. Very well: notice is given that soon
your spirit will be broken. The petition is lodged at the Daikwan's
office. There will be difficulty in gathering principal and interest.
Just wait." He said these words on leaving, ready to make a bolt of it.
With _zo[u]ri_ (sandal) on one foot and a wooden clog (_geta_) on the
other rapidly he ran away. Left alone O'Iwa rose in haste. To the
conflagration burning in her bosom, was added the fuel of a woman's
temperament. If it were true! How learn? Pondering over the details
filled her with anxiety.

_O'Iwa_--"Ah! Ah! Ill feeling seeks to destroy--already it turns to
wickedness. Gombei's face betrayed him. His talk was specious. At sight
of the letter he read the doubting heart learns the truth. Burdensome
the knowledge for one's heart. The mind tastes the bitterness of
adversity. The hair of the head, behind the temples, is affected by the
feelings. To draw out the dressing stand to hand: the little combs of
willow, where are they? Sorrow effects change; as does entanglements of
the heart. The fine-toothed comb which holds the thousand strands of
hair--how now! It has been forgotten."

Again she took up the hair. To get it out of the way she took the front
hair in both hands, making space to see.

_O'Iwa_--"Alas! I fail to understand. To-day the vertigo is more
pronounced than usual; especially with the hair like this. Did sickness
cause the loss?"

As she spoke, she drew the cover from the mirror. Reflected in it was a
face to inspire fear. Ha! Frightened, she rose and drew back. Though she
looked around her--there was no one. Alas! How strange! Thus she stood.
Then leaning forward carefully she scanned the mirror. "Ya! Ya! Since
when has my face been like this? It is completely altered." As if she
could repair the ravages to self and features squint-eyed she stood and
gazed. To sight she seemed a woman of evil. "Hai! Ha!" She fell
prostrate. "How now! How pitiful!" Like one crazed she arose. Her body
writhed in pain, at the pit of the stomach. These stomach pains, of
frequent occurrence, now seized her. Thus long she lay writhing where
she was.

While she twisted in agony; knowing nothing of what has happened, and
hearing the wheedling voice of a crying child, Kosuké had returned and
was at the entrance.

_Kosuké_--"Honoured lady, long have you been kept waiting. The honoured
priest had matter to relate. In Yotsuya I went from this place to that,
in effort to coax supply. But just now.... Is she suckling the child?"
While speaking he drew close--"In the meantime the honoured illness has
developed beyond measure. After retiring for the night you walk in your
sleep. Eh! Deign to be a little prudent."

Softly the child came to her side. On seeing in what agony she was:

_Kosuké_--"Ya! Alas! Alas! Have you again one of those hysterical
attacks, now so frequent? Okusama! I say!"

To restore her from the fit to consciousness he raised her in his arms.
Regarding with attention her frightful appearance:

_Kosuké_--"Yo! Yo! Yo! Yo! This face of the Okusama: Ma! What can be the
matter?"

He staggered in bewilderment.

_Kosuké_--"How changed! The Danna is absent. Heigh-ho! Ma! How has this
occurred? What can be done? The cold water in the kettle here...."

Opening her mouth he made her swallow a mouthful. He placed his mouth to
her ear.

_Kosuké_--"Okusama! Your ladyship!"

Gently he stroked her back. Thus nursed, the breath of the heartbroken
O'Iwa faintly returned.

_O'Iwa_--"Hei! Has Kosuké returned? Why do you stroke me thus? I had but
gone to sleep, just now."

"Oh! Oh!" said he--"Ma! Ma! How joyful. Ah! Iya! I say, Okusama; how
long have you been in that state? Your face inspires fear."

At his question again she was the woman. The tears in her breast rose
high and overflowed. For a time she did not answer. When a little calm:

_O'Iwa_--"Deign then to listen. As usual Iémon Dono went forth to
worship at Hachimangu[u]. Subsequently my vertigo was too pronounced.
Two or three drinks were taken of the medicine prescribed by Suian Dono.
Secretly at the rear entered Naosuké no Gombei, to make illicit
courtship. Various were his pleas. Thus--Iémon Dono was deeply in love
with the daughter of Okumura. The worship (_kami-mairi_) was all a lie.
He was contracted to Koúmé. Hence his affection for me was at an end.
This change was due to the drug. Hear what is to be done. Love
unrequited is to be satisfied by revenge. Thus did Gombei put the
matter. But it is not likely that my husband is so cruel. Heart again
will turn to heart. The attack of vertigo was strong. The hair was
pulled out. Moreover, suddenly the face became altered.... My
appearance: Ma! Gombei then did not lie. By the plotting of the Okumura,
parent and child, I have drunk poison. They have an understanding with
Suian. Eh! At the thought--at the thought--anger rises. My husband, a
man of note, with him she commits adultery. Hence the hatred of these
people. Since the poison has been quaffed; as serpent, as demon, none
shall be my equal. The Okumura, parent and child, are you the kind thus
to act!"

Suddenly she sprang up, and would have dashed out at the front. At her
act the frightened Kosuké put his arms around and stopped her.

_Kosuké_--"Heigh! Heigh! I say, Okusama! The expression of your face has
changed. Heigh-ho! Whither away? Alas! It is plain that she would go to
the _yashiki_ of Okumura. Evil her purpose. She would confute the malice
spoken by Koúmé, by parent and child. She would fetch away with her
Iémon Dono. Iya! Ho, there! Your honoured judgment strays. She believes
in what Gombei has said; that he is with the Okumura. Does she not
remember times past, the reproof of the Danna? Sa! As before! As before!
As before! Put on outward seeming. Deign to be calm. No! No! No! Though
there be shame; display a smile. Do but this. The prudence of the lady
carries the day. The colour, the perfume, of the flower has no effect.
Sa! She won't stop! She will go! Thither she will take her way! The
conflagration of her wrath is in her glare. She goes, and Kosuké remains
behind!" At a sound she looked around. The little boy was weeping
bitterly at his mother's state. The tie of blood, her affection,
prevailed.

_O'Iwa_--"Oh! Bonka! Bonka! Bonka! The pretty fellow grieves."

She drew near to embrace him. Earnestly he looked in his mother's face.

_Child_--"Iya! Iya! My lady mother is not like this. I'm afraid! I'm
afraid!"

Weeping, the little boy dropped from her knee.

"Bei-yo! Please call my real lady mother."

_O'Iwa_--"Aré! Aré! Aré! Deign to hear that! In heart children are
without discernment. My appearance changed, he fears the presence of his
mother. To her side he will not approach. How, how comes this face!
Meeting with Iémon Dono one would think--one would think--my very self
meets with retribution for some deed done in a past existence. Husband
and beloved child--alas! they avoid my sight."

With lamentable cries she wept. Kosuké, too, was moved, and joined in
her tears. O'Iwa again inspected the appearance of her face.

_O'Iwa_--"To continue living thus in the world would be one unending
shame. Dying the grudge will be repaid. Holding thus the skirt prevents
my leaving. This must not be. To that place I go."

As the two struggled the girdle (_obi_) came loose. The contest was
brought to an end. At this juncture returned Hamiya Iémon. He had little
disposition to enter his home. Thus unexpectedly, without premeditation,
the two came face to face. Mutually they gazed at each other. "Ho! The
Danna: good day." Kosuké remained where he was, uneasily twisting. O'Iwa
clasped tight the breast of her husband's coat. "Heigh! Iémon Dono."

_O'Iwa_--"Complete has been the silence toward me. Every night, every
night, polluted. With Koúmé have pillows been exchanged." Speech and
voice vibrated with jealousy. She glared at him. Without showing alarm:

_Iémon_--"Ma! I don't understand. This way of acting is unusual. Why
look like that? In that manner painful the change in appearance."--"Why?
Why? Eh! You pretend ignorance. You pretend ignorance of the joyful
result. By the artifice of Koúmé, of parent and child, in unison with
Suian, a poisonous drug has been given me to drink. By this means I am
made unrecognizable. Would that never I had been born, to live so
deformed ... all due to the feeling aroused in these people. Sa! Sa! Sa!
Restore my former appearance! Bewitched, seized by anxious care, it
remains but to withdraw."

_Iémon_--"Ya! What mad talk! In my absence, loosening the cord of the
_obi_, secretly you indulge your lewdness. Detected by the master's eye,
disloyal as you are, death is the weighty punishment. Make ready!" At
hearing the unjust proposal the upright Kosuké with tears held tight his
knees.

_Kosuké_--"Heigh! Danna Sama. Iya! I say, Iémon Dono! This Kosuké an
adulterous fellow? Heigh-ho! It is unreasonable! Unreasonable!
Unreasonable! You speak for your own purpose. I, the mere servant, have
been to call the honoured priest to the Yotsuya. Returning home I found
the Okusama unconscious. When she learned the true state of affairs the
Okusama would have rushed forth. To stop her I seized the end of the
_obi_. And that is to be unchaste! Iya! A paramour--heigh-ho! That is
too much! Too much! Too much! It is to go to excess. Truly, truly, for
these years and months you have gone forth in the world. Such has been
your conduct. You have allowed a sight of you--at the Bon Matsuri, at
the New Year, in accidental meetings on the street when on some mission.
Why! The very dogs bark--the honoured constables of the night watch--eh!
they administer reproof."

_O'Iwa_--"Lamentable the distress. How many times! Sleepless the
nights--the time when one should slumber. But this does not move him.
Hence the unkindness of his speech."

_Kosuké_--"Eh! He don't listen. Danna Dono, beating the _tatami_ one
weeps with regret."

O'Iwa forthwith sprang up in haste--sprang up--sprang up.

"Superior is the concubine to the lady wife. Below the basely mean is
one placed. In the relation of husband and wife, the thought is to treat
the husband with respect. Such is the duty of woman. To you the poverty
and distress are not displayed. Obtaining her means to live by washing
and occasional tasks, yet the wife is discarded. The sum total of the
sunshine transforms the flowers; invisible their change. Regardless of
self-distrust of the past is put aside. But you act with cruel motive; a
grudge as lasting as a night without moonlight. From the clouds the
drizzle falls on bamboo and on village. And between the intervals of
rain there is naught but weeping."

Iémon refused to listen:

_Iémon_--"Ya! Mere excuses these; mere excuses these. In the master's
absence the cord of the _obi_ is loosed. Madly you go your rounds. The
lewdness is evident. Sa! Make honest confession." At the outrageous
words of the husband the voice of O'Iwa trembled still more:

_O'Iwa_--"Eh! 'Tis your own sin you would conceal. Regardless of self
you would impute evil reputation to me. Having driven me out, you would
make Koúmé your wife. But by that you shall gain nothing. Miserable one!
Unblushingly do you join in the hate of the Okumura, parent and child?"

With a rapid motion she snatched his dagger. She half turned:

_Iémon_--"Ya! Whither? Whither? Here one must pick one's words. This is
not the time to inquire into the facts. Iya! Iya! Iya! Where do you go?"

At their quarrel Kosuké was perplexed. Said the child in troubled voice:

_Child_--"Honoured mother--where go ye? Honoured father--forbearance,
patience."

He clung to their garments in kindness and affection. The eyes of the
two in Shurado[u] (Hell of fighting) were blinded. On this side and that
they pulled at the scabbard of the sword. In the wrestling, the
springing in and recoil, the sword slipped from the scabbard. Without
intention to five or six inches it pierced the shoulder. Atto! The wife
fell--"Namu Sambo[u]!"[42] Plucking out the sword O'Iwa cast it aside.
By the action of retributive fate the point of the weapon pierced the
chest of Kosuké. The wound was fatal. Seven revolutions and a fall:
alas! he was dying. Close under his feet the blow of Iémon had reached
the child. With but a single cry forthwith he died. At the accident the
husband was at a loss what to do. He stood stupified. With difficulty
O'Iwa rose from the ground.

_O'Iwa_--"Heigh-ho! Heigh-ho! Heigh-ho! You would kill me! Oh! Since you
would kill, put into deed the ardent wish. Wretch! An idea--Koúmé, the
parent and child: these are to be seized and put to death. Be it so!"

With eyes of hate, her hair fallen down, jealously glaring, in
appearance she was just like a female devil. Blood curdling, she
inspired fear. The husband gave vent to his inner thought:

_Iémon_--"Though one kill without intent, yet the brandishing of the
sword is one's own deed, one's very act. It is the punishment of Heaven
for unchastity and jealousy. Bear it in mind."

At the cruel words Kosuké, drawing painful breath:

_Kosuké_--"Eh! To us, to us, to us, such speech applies not. Unkind,
unrighteous, is this death punishment. There is naught to compare to it.
Very wicked and unprincipled, surely you are possessed of a devil!
Seldom is the life of a serving man grudged him; unconsidered as he is.
Forgetful, the evil reputation of lechery is attached, and death the
portion. Eh! How regrettable! The sight is unseemly. 'Twas you who
inflicted the wound! To the Okusama also, evil the name. Thus, without
intention, the end of your life is not witnessed by your child."

_Iémon_--"By the hand of another your wound, by one your parent! On my
part--on my part--had I aught to do with this? Heigh! Am I not grieved?
Eh! Cold? Unfeeling? A wound to myself could not pain more."

Vainly writhing he raised and embraced the body of the child. As sadly
he lamented, O'Iwa crawled up close. Tightly her arms clasped the dead
body of her child.

_O'Iwa_--"Alas! Alas! Inosuké! Inosuké! The selfishness of your father;
the temperament of the mother; foolish their thoughts. Thus have you
ended life.... How great is the grudge. Heigh! Exercise forbearance!
Exercise forbearance! Deign to show forbearance. Parent and child are
related for but one life, 'tis said. Now separated, again in what world
will there be meeting? Men are born into the wide world. There is such a
thing as sympathy, 'tis said. Before your eyes lie _kerai_ (retainer),
wife, and child. Now, on the very brink of time, not once do you recite
the Buddha's name. Abandon your inordinate desires. Is your heart that
of a demon? Eh! A snake? Cruel and cold to your wife, you reckon up your
various hates. With Kosuké I am the one to lament. Tears overflow.
Steady the fall of rain of Yo[u]suji, of _sumidare_ (the rainy season).
When dying the chief of birds vomits forth blood with his song: so I."

_Iémon_--"Ya! The song she sings inspires no regret. A prayer said and
the child enters Nirvana. Namu Amida Butsu! As for these two--I would
kill them by inches; as they twisted, and staggered, and fell grasping
at the air, and in every way showed their agony. In the next world may
they meet with a mountain set with sharp-edged swords, so cruel as to
inspire pity."

Just then came running to the front entrance Suian. He gasped for
breath:

"Heigh! Heigh! Iémon Dono!"

_Suian_--"O'Iwa Dono's appearance has changed. It was the drug, our own
secret nostrum, administered at request of the honoured mother of
Okumura. Though sorrow was felt, unexpected the good luck in killing the
honoured wife. Henceforth come out openly. Who would not drain the
_saké_ cups with Koúmé Dono! The three lands (China, India, Japan) are
the inheritance of one who was but an adopted son. All in good order!
All in good order! All in good order! Ha! Ha! Ha! Ha! Ha! Sa! To set
about it at once."

The husband concealed tears of regret for past conduct.

_Iémon_--"Plain it is that wife, child, and _kerai_, though deserving
compassion, have found death. 'Twas determined by fate in a previous
existence. But to obviate fear of future disaster, though not the
original purpose, the dead bodies of these two are to be nailed to a
door panel, with the inscription--'unchaste and jealous.' Let them float
away on the current of the Nenashigawa. The entrance of the house is
close to the inner room. Make ready: it will be best to leave by the
rear. Quick! Quick! But...."

_Suian_--"It happens that the neighbor Dansuké comes." He bent and
peeped through the entrance. "Dansuké! Dansuké!" Dansuké Mizuo in
presence, mouth to ear he was informed. "Namu! Namu! Namu! Namu!" He
nodded consent. The two men talked in whispers. The dead bodies of the
two (O'Iwa and Kosuké) were carried into the inner room. For some time
Naosuké Gombei had been watching what went on, peeping out and
listening. He appeared from the shadow.

_Gombei_--"Yai! Unjustly have the blameless wife and _kerai_ been
punished by Hamiya Iémon. Complaint is to be made at the Daikwan's
court."

When he would rush forth he was pulled back by the girdle (_obi_). "Ya!
Ya! Whither would you go? There is matter of importance to hear."--"The
intent is plain. You would kill me." One had the long sword of the
soldier. Two or three passes and he was nearly cut down by the skill of
Hamiya. When he tried to flee, from behind he received a cut through the
shoulder. It finished him. Then he (Iémon) would hide the dead body of
his child from the eyes and reproach of men. Close at hand was a heavy
stone trough. For funeral rites--"Namu Amida Butsu!" Into the well crib
he threw it. Aré! Marvellous! Suddenly the house creaked and trembled.
From somewhere came swarms of rats. Heigh! Incomprehensible! Iémon
wavered. Singling him out they flew and seized him. Sha! Confused he
slashed in attempt to drive them off. Lightning blazed around the sword;
many phosphorescent lights--in wreaths, double, triple. To the end of
the worlds his retribution.

Thus the causes, origins, are made known of what remains as the Yotsuya
Kwaidan.

END OF THE GIDAYU

[It can be noted that Japanese thought and expression are not very
different from that of the West. An idea perhaps can be obtained from
this _gidayu_ as to why the native waxes enthusiastic over the pose and
vivid gestures of the _geisha_, who is the one to interpret these
dramatic recitations. To her falls the "_kotoba_." The descriptive lines
are recited by a chorus to the harsh and effective twang of the
_samisen_. The _samisen_ may not afford music, but it can give
expression to the emotional in feeling. The _gidayu_ recitation is a
favourite art with the Go Inkyo[u] Sama. Symposia are held, before which
the old gentleman recites, often enough without chorus; for he, and the
_geisha_, at times have to fill the rôle both of "_kotoba_" and chorus,
modulating the voice according to the theme. Symposia is not an
unbefitting term. Meetings are held for public competition in _gidayu_
recitation; but in the privacy of one's circle and hobby the banquet is
an important feature--at least to the guests. In his history of
"Japanese Literature" (Dai Nihon Bungaku Shi, pp. 591-596) Suzuki
Cho[u]ko[u] gives a long extract from the play, as sample of Tsuruya's
powers as a dramatist. Adopted into the House of the actor Tsuruya
Namboku, and marrying his daughter, Katsu Byo[u]zo[u] in turn assumed
the name Tsuruya Namboku.]


B

[In the original the story by Momogawa Jakuen is found in the Kwaidan
Hyaku Monogatari, vol. ii, p. 83 (Kokkwado[u]-To[u]kyo[u]). This
collection has already been referred to, as sketching a number of the
best known Japanese _kwaidan_. The present example furnishes a specimen
of _ko[u]dan_ style, and has application to the present subject. It also
instances how the Japanese stage boldly faces situations, the exigencies
of which call for the greatest adaptation and facility on the part of
actor and stage manager. The "Yotsuya Kwaidan" in the stage
representation presents a number of critical scenes in which both
qualities are severely strained. Rapid metamorphosis is a _sine qua
non_. And it is effected--somehow.]

The _ko[u]dan_:


ONOÉ KIKUGORO[U] NO YU[U]REI

From former times and generations the Otowa[43] House held a monopoly
in the representation of ghosts. Its representative in the fifth
generation was the most skilful of all at spectres. This man of the
third generation lived at Muko[u]jima no Terajima. He was commonly
called Terajima no Kikugoro[u]; his stage name was Baiko[u]. This man's
daughter was the mother of the fifth generation. Thus it can be seen
that he was the maternal grandfather of this fifth representative. This
third Kikugoro[u] was the first to act the Yotsuya Kwaidan, in Bunsei
8th year 7th month (14th August-13th September, 1825) at the Nakamura-za
(theatre). The author was the noted Tsuruya Namboku, who constructed the
very famous "To[u]kaido[u] Yotsuya Kwaidan." O'Iwa San, the attendant
(_wakato[u]_) Kohei, and Enya no Ro[u]nin Sato[u] Yo[u]mo Shichi, these
parts fell to Kikugoro[u]. Matsumoto Koshiro[u], he who strutted it at
the Ko[u]raiya, did the Naosuké Gombei. Iémon was the part of the
seventh Danjuro[u]; later Ebizo, who was the real father of the ninth of
the name. The staging of O'Iwa Sama includes--1st scene, the combing of
the hair; 2nd scene, the Sunamura Ombo[u]bori; 3rd scene, Iémon ill in
the dark room at Hebiyama; 4th scene, the _yashiki_ of Naosuké Gombei at
Fukagawa Sankaku. O'Iwa appears at the scene of the combing of the hair
as mentioned, in the incident where the guests are received, and in the
3rd scene at Hebiyama. Iémon is ill. Splitting apart the lantern set out
during the Festival of the Dead (Bon Matsuri) the ghost of O'Iwa appears
with the child in her embrace. Iémon receives them as would a stone
Jizo[u]. O'Iwa, at sight of the fright of Iémon, laughs--ki, ki, ki. At
once they fade away; and at once the ghost of Kohei the _wakato[u]_
takes her place, he who was charged with unchaste conduct with O'Iwa. It
was the part of the performer to please the uninitiated by some
strenuous effort. The first performance at this theatre was for three
months--from the seventh to the ninth month. On consideration the drama
is of interest. O'Iwa is killed at Yotsuya. With the dead body of the
_wakato[u]_ Kohei she is fastened to a door, and from the rear the
scoundrel sets them adrift. Fishing at Ombo[u]bori, Iémon sees them
float by. From Yotsuya to Sunamura is a very great distance. It would
occupy a woman's legs for the space of a day; or faint-hearted fellows,
water drinkers, such of the kind as would try it. Winding along what
rivers, by what intersecting canals had they floated here? In no way
does one conceive. All the more the reasons influencing the author's
design are not known. Very interesting is the story, to the cheerful
character, and those not to be chilled by apparitions. At all events
they get to Ombo[u]bori? The third Kikugoro[u], the first to take the
part of O'Iwa, was a superlative actor, skilled in capturing the people.
In the third scene, the dark room at Hebiyama, the ghost comes forth
from the _Bon_ lantern. Every day the _kozo[u]_ (man or boy as
apprentice) of the utility shop in Asakusa Umacho[u] slowly took down
the lantern covered with white paper. In a straight line, before the
eyes of all, he passed along Kuramaédo[u]ri, crossing Asakusa. From
Yokoyamacho[u] he crossed to Daimaru no Mae. Passing through
Norigyo[u]cho[u] he reached the Nakamura-za in Sakaicho[u]. As he passed
along these streets crowded with people, the eyes of men were attracted:

_No. 1_--"Every day, every day, the _kozo[u]_ goes by carrying that
_Bon_ lantern. Where does he go?"

_No. 2_--"He? Kikugoro[u] now is playing O'Iwa Sama at the Nakamura-za.
The ghost issues from that _Bon_ lantern. The lantern used is brought
every day by the _kozo[u]_."

_No. 1_--"Ha! A practical application. We must be sure and go see."
Through this advertisement the guests came readily. As fact, every day
but the one _Bon_ lantern was used. Split apart, it was repaired. From
the first day, up to the performances of a thousand autumns, one lantern
answered all purposes. Truly Kikugoro[u] was more than a clever actor.
He was wonderful in securing the good will of people. No actor was equal
to him. Tradesmen, Government officials, learned men, refined people--he
was skilful at gaining their support. Hence he did not lack money. His
_status_ did not affect him. When as usual the _Bon_ lantern one day was
to be carried out, Kikugoro[u] made his pupil Onozo[u] the bearer. Said
Kikugoro[u]:

_Kikugoro[u]_--"Onozo[u], don't I frighten you somewhat in this shape?"

_Onozo[u]_--"I'm not in the least frightened. Every day acting as your
assistant I'm not afraid."

_Kikugoro[u]_--"What? Not afraid? Say that you're afraid."

_Onozo[u]_--"Patron, that is unreasonable. One not afraid--is not
afraid. Hence it cannot be helped."

_Kikugoro[u]_--"Anyhow, say you are afraid."

_Onozo[u]_--"I'm not at all afraid."

_Kikugoro[u]_--"An obstinate rascal, this."

While speaking--_pokari_, he gave _Onozo[u]_ a whack on the head. As it
was he went through the performance. Coming to the green room, at once
he called Onozo[u].

_Kikugoro[u]_--"Fool and low fellow."

_Onozo[u]_--"Why is it then you would strike a fool and low fellow with
a stick?"

_Kikugoro[u]_--"You are just like a fool. A little while ago when told
to be afraid of me, you would not say you were afraid."

_Onozo[u]_--"Patron, that is to be unreasonable. I attend you. Every day
I see you."

_Kikugoro[u]_--"I know you are not afraid. But you are the very one who
acts as my attendant. In public you are to look at me as one frightened
beyond measure. If this be not widely published, will not the theatre be
deserted? An actor who is good only at acting, he is not to be called a
clever man. He must draw people. Fool and low fellow!"

_Onozo[u]_--"Naruhodo! Since you say it--I'm afraid."

_Kikugoro[u]_--"Your answer now is to the purpose."

Hence on considering the matter, was not Kikugoro[u] in every way a
talented man? For the space of eighty days this theatre turned away
guests. Later, in Tempo[u] 7th year 7th month (12th August to 11th
September, 1836) again this drama was produced. The actor was the same
as at the previous production. On this occasion Kikugoro[u] took
thought. As it was the second time, it must be changed in presentation
to an audience. _Do[u]mo!_ There was the coming on of the ghost. It is
clad in a grey robe. If O'Iwa wears a grey robe, and the _wakato[u]_
Kohei wears a grey robe, both being the same to view this would fail to
interest. He continually worried. Nevertheless it would not do to wear
armour; and a ghost in _kami-shimo_[44] raises no chill. Some
contrivance must be hit upon. Day and night the matter worried him.
Habitué of the gallery of this Morita-za was a man named Tsutaya no
Yoshi, commonly known as Tsutayoshi. An extraordinarily dissolute fellow
he borrowed to the four sides and eight directions. At this time in the
Yoshiwara Sumicho[u] was a tenement placed in the rear of the prostitute
houses. He removed thither, and soothed his troubles by living alone.
His face washed in the morning, at once he ran forth. He ate his meals
at a cheap eating house. A varied meal consumed he made his way to the
Morita-za. Lunch was eaten in the theatre. On the return he took a drink
and then went home. In truth he was a lively fellow. The Yotsuya Kwaidan
had just been determined on for the close of the sixth month (July). At
sundown he returned to his home in the Yoshiwara. On the way he
drank--the strongest of liquors. At once he hung up the mosquito net and
went inside. Not knowing front from rear he went to sleep. Pressed by a
necessity the sound of the wooden clappers (_hyoshigi_) made him open
his eyes. It was the harlot quarter, the 9th hour and more (after 3
A.M.), and the liveliness of the night was over. The quiet of the place
inspired fear. From evening he had not stirred from the mosquito net,
but had slept. The light had gone out, and it was pitch dark. Soundly
had he slept. In the jar was fresh water for drinking. Greedily he
drank.

_Yoshi_--"I have slept--in a way to cause fear. It is now past the 9th
hour. I still can sleep without stint."

Again he entered the net. He drew the tobacco box close to his pillow
head. He would smoke. Looking toward the _andon_, beneath it, faintly
outlined, he saw somebody.

_Yoshi_--"Who is there? This place used to be a brothel. Now it is a
tenement. I rent it. It don't do to have it taken for a brothel. Oi!
You--whence do you come?"

At the words--he! It disappeared.

_Yoshi_--"I say now! A marvellous thing--that over there. A kind of
dream--extraordinary: I don't remember having a grudge with anyone. Yai!
If the spirit which just came entertains a grudge I have never even
dreamed of such. I am a dissolute fellow, but remember no grudge with
anyone."

Thus loud and wrathfully he shouted out. As one without fear he went to
sleep. Waking up, the next day he left the house to go to the hot bath
in Umacho[u]. On the way he breakfasted. Then he went to the Morita-za.
Although the performance had not begun, as it was a first representation
the theatre was crowded with people. Said a friend:

_Friend_--"Yoshi San, the colour of your face is bad. Are you affected
by the heat?"

_Yoshi_--"Liking strong spirits, I feel badly. Moreover, last night a
strange thing was witnessed. I feel out of sorts."

_Friend_--"What was it?"

_Yoshi_--"In the middle of last night I opened my eyes. Dimly outlined
beside the lantern (_andon_) sat a rascal; some fellow who had been
amusing himself at a neighbouring brothel. I thought that being drunk
with wine he had come there by mistake. 'Who are you?' Thus I shouted.
It disappeared. _Do[u]mo!_ It was a strange occurrence. Was it a ghost,
thought I? I could remember no grudge with another person. Anyhow, in
all likelihood it is no ghost, thought I. However I look at it, I don't
understand."

_Friend_--"Hei! Yoshi San, it was your own imagination."

_Yoshi_--"Though I considered it a vision of my own, as strange I
mention it."

_Friend_--"If you feel bad it will be well to stay away for to-night."

_Yoshi_--"I don't think I feel badly in any other way. To-night--for the
whole night--I'll make the test."

That day he returned to the Yoshiwara house. That night no one was seen.
But when he did see it, was the thing a matter of his own imagination?
The next day he came to the theatre. The friend was waiting for him.

_Friend_--"Yoshi San, did it appear at night?"

_Yoshi_--"Iya! At night it did not appear. In the middle of the night
opening my eyes I looked with especial care to the eight sides. Nothing
that could be considered suspicious was to be seen."

_Friend_--"Then it was as I said. It being at one time a brothel, would
not something appear in this house? Having this wholly in mind, the
thing presented itself to your eyes."

_Yoshi_--"Doubtless it is but that; a freak of the imagination."

That night returning to the Yoshiwara, nothing happened. A space of
five nights passed. His habit was to return early; and as his thin dress
was wet with sweat he would change it. Going upstairs he took out the
thin garment from the clothes-basket (_tsuzura_). With this in hand he
was about to descend. Now as at one time the place had been a brothel
the steps were broad and wide. Seated on the lower step, lying face
downward, was somebody.

_Yoshi_--"Ah! Has it come?"

Being a courageous fellow, while speaking he raised his leg.

_Yoshi_--"You're in the way."

Pon: he gave a kick. There was not the slightest resistance.
Forthwith--ha! it was gone.

_Yoshi_--"_Do[u]mo!_ Remarkable: it is a strange occurrence."

While speaking he changed his robe and lit the fire. Making the water
boil, with Echizen peat he heated some wine he had bought on the road
and brought home with him. With _tsukudani_,[45] or something of that
kind to eat, he drank and thought.

_Yoshi_--"To-day it is no product of my imagination. Who can that rascal
be?"

Talking to himself, he drank the _saké_. Attending to preliminaries he
would go to bed. He went to the necessary and opened the door. Some one
stood there, with his back to him.

_Yoshi_--"Here again?"

At the words it disappeared. No matter how brave he was, that night he
felt badly and did not sleep. Awaiting dawn he was quick to go forth. On
coming to the theatre--

_Friend_--"Good day: how goes it with Yoshi San? Are you not very much
out of tone?"

_Yoshi_--"At night it came. Moreover it appeared twice."

_Friend_--"Did it appear?"

_Yoshi_--"At first it was seated on the stair. The second time it was
inside the necessary."

_Friend_--"Hei! That is marvellous. Probably it is the work of fox or
badger (_tanuki_)."

This talk abruptly terminated. Tsutayoshi was a bold fine fellow.
Unmoved, he retired to his own home in the Yoshiwara. After that nothing
was seen for several days. Just as he was forcing a way into the
theatre--

_Man_--"Yoshi San! At the Bairin (Plum Tree) over the way is the master
of Otowaya. He is urgent to see you; so he says. It will be well to go
at once."

_Yoshi_--"Was he told I was here?"

_Man_--"Ah!"

_Yoshi_--"How annoying! The Otawaya San has lent me money. _Do[u]mo!_ A
meeting, 'tis bad news."

_Man_--"As nothing was said about it--go. Surely the return of the loan
is not involved."

_Yoshi_--"It's not to be avoided. I'll go and see."

Opposite to the theatre was the tea house called the "Bairin." He went
in.

_Yoshi_--"Good-day."

_Maid_--"Oya! Yoshi San. As the master of Otowaya is waiting upstairs
for you, just condescend to go up."

_Yoshi_--"Ah! Is that so? Condescend to pardon."

Don, don, he climbed the stairs. At the end of a six-mat room was a man
fanning himself. He was alone. It was Kikugoro[u], the third of the
name. He had been noted as a handsome man. However, at this time he was
an old man. The white summer garb of that very fine quality of
cloth-grass known as _jo[u]fu_ was girded in by a _chakenjo[u] obi_.[46]
Of his profession there was not a hint.

_Kikugoro[u]_--"Sa! Yoshi San, come here, please."

_Yoshi_--"The patron: _do[u]mo_! truly it has been rude not to come and
see you. I have not crossed the threshold."

_Kikugoro[u]_--"Iya! Why speak so? You now live in the Yoshiwara."

_Yoshi_--"That is so; for a long time I lived in Fukiyacho[u]. The
neighbourhood was a bad one. I had borrowed money. It was like running
away in the night. A one-time brothel now the rent is ridiculously
cheap. _Mikoshi_ (carriages) are kept in it now."

_Kikugoro[u]_--"The Yoshiwara is a gay place. For people who would amuse
themselves there is none superior. It is an excellent locality."

_Yoshi_--"One can find whatever is desired."

_Kikugoro[u]_--"So Yoshi San, now you live alone."

_Yoshi_--"Hai! I'm alone."

_Kikugoro[u]_--"I've just heard the talk of people. A ghost appears at
your place."

_Yoshi_--"Who said such a thing?"

_Kikugoro[u]_--"Iya! It was heard, by accident. Is it true?"

_Yoshi_--"Hai! First it was seen beside the _andon_; then on the
stairway, and in the necessary."

_Kikugoro[u]_--"A strange matter! Is it man or woman?"

_Yoshi_--"_Do[u]mo!_ That I don't know. It was seen as in a mist.
Whether man or woman, I don't know."

_Kikugoro[u]_--"Are there male and female ghosts?"

_Yoshi_--"Male or female--I know nothing about it."

_Kikugoro[u]_--"What its nature? When it appears this time, condescend
to take a good look at it." He continued (then)--"The present drama of
the Yotsuya Kwaidan--as to my part, as you well know, O'Iwa and Kohei
before the very eyes must change places in an instant. For both to wear
the grey _kimono_ lacks interest. Which of them is to change? It is on
my mind. _Do[u]mo!_ Thought fails to solve the question. Hence the
request to you. What kind of dress does that ghost wear? That is what I
want to learn."

_Yoshi_--"Hei!"

_Kikugoro[u]_--"But Yoshi San: It is no mere request. I loaned you ten
_ryo[u]_."

_Yoshi_--"Patron, do you condescend still to remember it?"

_Kikugoro[u]_--"Deign not to jest. Who would forget such a rascal? I'll
wipe out that ten _ryo[u]_--and give you five _ryo[u]_ in addition. How
now? Condescend to observe."

_Yoshi_--"Thanks are felt. When it appears I'll take a good look at it."

_Kikugoro[u]_--"With the month's change the first representation takes
place. It must be ascertained in the intervening time. Probably in four
or five days it will be seen."

_Yoshi_--"That is so. _Do[u]mo!_ The opponent being a ghost, will it
appear to-night? Or has is ended by going away? That I don't know.
Having found out its dwelling place, I'll send a postal-card."

_Kikugoro[u]_--"Don't jest. As just said, I'll give you five _ryo[u]_.
Be careful; and please take a good look."

_Yoshi_--"Respectfully heard and understood. This time I'll get a good
look at it."

Thus agreed Tsutayoshi returned that night to the Yoshiwara.

_Yoshi_--"A pleasing thing! Ten _ryo[u]_ wiped off, and five _ryo[u]_
received in addition. Thanks: a fine bit of work. It will be well if the
rascal of a ghost comes to-night. Anyhow, just before the _Bon_ it
suffers distress beyond measure. For several days nothing has been seen
of it. Its purpose may have changed: Yai! If the ghost is to appear,
please show up at once. Don't it yet appear? Oi! Ghost!"

The ghost was not to be drawn out by this display of energy. Several
days passed without the slightest sign of it. Every day Kikugoro[u] came
to the Bairin and sent for Tsutayoshi.

_Kikugoro[u]_--"Yoshi San, has it not yet appeared?"

_Yoshi_--"_Do[u]mo!_ The patron is vexed. Every day, every day, it is
awaited; and not a sign of it. Feeling out of sorts, has it not died?
That's my idea."

_Kikugoro[u]_--"Oi! Oi! Yoshi San. Being dead, is it not a ghost? Once
dead, does the rascal die again?"

_Yoshi_--"_Do[u]mo!_ Patron, nothing is known of one's spirit. For it
not to appear is annoying. Spirits (_ki_) suffer pain; and suffering
pain they don't show themselves. It seems that you want it to appear
before the first representation. If I see it, I get five _ryo[u]_. I
would like to have it show itself before the _Bon_. My purpose is to get
through this year's _Bon_[47] by means of the ghost."

_Kikugoro[u]_--"Anyhow--have a care."

_Yoshi_--"Agreed."

That night he went home and drank wine.

_Man_--"Yoshi San, is he at home?"

Thereupon without ceremony entered an intimate friend, from Sakaicho[u]
near Fukiyacho[u]. He had loaned money to Tsutayoshi, and now sought the
repayment.

_Man_--"Yoshi San, you say you will bring it, you will bring it; and you
make no sign of bringing it. That was my money, and the failure to
return it is vexing. Will matters change before the _Bon_?"

_Yoshi_--"Wait but a little. If to-night something materializes I get
five _ryo[u]_. The money in hand, at once I will pay you back."

_Man_--"What is going to materialize? The five _ryo[u]_ you spoke of?"

_Yoshi_--"In fact at my house a ghost appears. The Otowaya San heard of
it. As of immediate use to the theatre I am carefully to observe what
the ghost wears. He says he will give me five _ryo[u]_. The money
obtained, at once the two _ryo[u]_ will be repaid. Wait until that
happens."

_Man_--"Oi! Oi! Yoshi San. Does a ghost really appear?"

_Yoshi_--"It really does."

_Man_--"What kind of a ghost?"

_Yoshi_--"As to that--right before one; a most blood-curdling thing.
Anyhow, I shiver all over at sight of it. Just like this--"

_Man_--"Where does it show itself?"

_Yoshi_--"Just where you are seated."

_Man_--"Yoshi San, jokes don't go."

Without waiting for an answer he fled. Seeing this said Tsutayoshi:

_Yoshi_--"A ghost is a very profitable object. Do but speak of it, and
he who would collect borrowed money takes to flight. If it appears,
money is obtained. Hence a ghost is a remarkable thing. After this when
the dry goods man comes for repayment, I'll chase him out again with the
ghost. Anyhow this house brings good luck. The rent is cheap, and there
is a ghost which enables one to dodge paying loans. Thanks: henceforth
in renting a house I'll confine myself to haunted houses. So much for
that. Will it show itself to-night?"

Tsutayoshi hung up the mosquito net. He drank a glass. Thus reinforced,
tranquil and pleased he laid down on the pillow. After sleeping awhile
he opened his eyes. All around was quiet. The bustle of the night had
ceased. There was not a sound. Outside the mosquito net the wick of the
_andon_ had burned low and gave a faint light. Suddenly the bell of the
eighth watch (1 A.M.) was heard on Bentenyama. Thereupon--de!... the
sound was heard and the light of the _andon_ went out. Then as a mist an
object like to a human being (_hito_) was visible. Ha! Tsutayoshi was
frightened. Was this the ghost? He rolled up the mosquito net, the
pupils of the eyes intent. Thus he had it in plain view. The hair of the
head was in wild disorder. To sight it was certain it was a man. He wore
a grey cotton garment.

_Yoshi_--"That's it!"

At the sudden exclamation--Ha! It disappeared. The _andon_ having
previously gone out truly it was the very blackness of night. Coming out
from under the mosquito net he (Yoshi) lit the wick. Smoking his tobacco
he staid awake until dawn. In time the East became white. At once he
left the house. He entered the bath at Agecho[u], breakfasted as usual
at the cheap eating house in Komégata, and then went to the Morita-za in
Kibikicho[u].

_Friend_--"Good-day."

_Yoshi_--"Iya! It's hot to-day."

_Friend_--"How now, Yoshi San? The O'Baké?"

_Yoshi_--"As usual--it came in the night."

_Friend_--"Is that so? When Otowaya San hears that, he will rejoice."

While in talk a message came from Kikugoro[u]. At once Tsutayoshi went
to the Bairin. Otowaya was waiting for him.

_Kikugoro[u]_--"Yoshi San, how now--the ghost?"

_Yoshi_--"Patron, condescend to rejoice. It appeared in the night."

_Kikugoro[u]_--"Did it appear? The rascal is brave. Is it man or woman?"

_Yoshi_--"A man in all likelihood."

_Kikugoro[u]_--"The dress?"

_Yoshi_--"Was seen to be grey cotton--positively so."

_Kikugoro[u]_--"That's interesting. A _kimono_ of grey colour just suits
the ghost of the _wakato[u]_ Kohei. Sa! Yoshi San, in accordance with
the bargain I give you five _ryo[u]_."

_Yoshi_--"_Do[u]mo!_ Thanks are felt."

_Kikugoro[u]_--"There they are. Yoshi San, you are a brave fellow. Life
in a haunted house is unpleasant. It will be well to remove elsewhere."

_Yoshi_--"Iya! A haunted house is splendid. A friend just now came for
the return of borrowed money. When told of a ghost appearing, he fled.
Again, merely for noting what the ghost wears, you tell me I will get
five _ryo[u]_. All this is due to the honoured shadow of the ghost. Thus
regarding (my) Yurei Dai Myo[u]jin Sama,[48] to abandon such a splendid
ghost and remove to some other place would change my luck. My purpose is
to go on living with this ghost."

_Kikugoro[u]_--"In that case, Yoshi San, it would be well to have the
house cleaned. _Do[u]mo!_ Don't you think it is the work of fox or
_tanuki_?"

_Yoshi_--"Naruhodo! At all events I'll have the house cleaned." So
receiving the money from Kikugoro[u], rejoicing Yoshi returned to the
Yoshiwara. On the way he took a glass or so. Somewhat drunk, he entered
the Tanaka no Mikawaya, a _tabi_ (sock) shop. The house was the owner of
the place where Tsutayoshi lived.

_Yoshi_--"Good-day."

_Mikawaya_--"Oya! Yoshi San. Are you on your return? Ma! Condescend to
enter. _Do[u]mo!_ The theatre now pleases the people. The audiences are
large."

_Yoshi_--"Thanks are felt."

_Mikawaya_--"What your business, Yoshi San?"

_Yoshi_--"Danna, I would like to have the house cleaned."

_Mikawaya_--"Cleaned?"

_Yoshi_--"_Do[u]mo!_ At present a supernatural object appears. It is
vexing. As I will furnish the wages of the workman, I thought it would
be well to have it cleaned."

_Mikawaya_--"Hei! What appears?"

_Yoshi_--"At times a ghost shows itself."

_Mikawaya_--"A ghost?"

_Yoshi_--"Once it showed itself beside the _andon_. The second time it
was seen in the necessary. At evening it was seated at the entrance to
the stairs. There is nothing to fear, unless it be the work of fox or
badger. It would be bad for outsiders to get wind of it; so I would like
to have the place cleaned."

_Mikawaya_--"Is it man or woman?"

_Yoshi_--"There is no doubt of its being a man, of small stature. His
dress plainly is of grey cotton."

_Mikawaya_--"A dress of grey cotton--the man of small stature. Un!
Jo[u]! It is that low fellow."

_Yoshi_--"Oi! Oi! Danna, did you know him? Was he a wicked fellow?
Setting up in the ghost way--pray excuse me."

_Landlord_--"Ma! Yoshi San, please hear what I have to say. The house
that I rent to you originally was a brothel called the Yamashiroya. The
landlord was an unrighteous fellow. One night an _oiran_ lacked any
guest.[49] He took her with him to the _seméba_--(punishment room) and
treated her most cruelly. No one called the place 'the Yamashiroya.' It
was known as the Onimisé (devil-shop) of Fushimicho[u]. It was just this
time last year that a _wakashu[u]_ (attendant) named Tokuzo fell in love
with a woman named Kotsu no Wakataké. Pressed for money, to get it he
had an eye to the pillows of the guests. From the low brothel mentioned
perhaps he would get a _bu_--a couple of _shu[u]_. A restitution
privately effected would have been well. He was roped up and carried off
to the town hall. In every way a low scoundrel he was sent to
Temmacho[u]. Soon after he died in the jail. Subsequently there were
nothing but unpleasant happenings at the Yamashiroya. It was completely
ruined. Later I bought it. Undecided about setting it up, I divided it
into two houses and rented them out."

_Yoshi_--"Hei!"

_Mikawaya_--"That Tokuzo, as the _wakashu[u]_ was called, when sent to
the town hall was dressed in the thin grey cotton robe given as present
to him by an _oiran_. I knew Tokuzo. He was flighty and good natured; an
interesting fellow. Of low stature, he was a good worker. Probably he
failed to carry out his purpose."

_Yoshi_--"Is that the case? It is a wonderful affair. Anyhow condescend
to make everything clean."

_Mikawaya_--"Agreed."

After this workmen came from the Mikawaya, and the cleaning up was
performed. Tsutayoshi at a subsequent meeting with Kikugoro[u] told him
the story of Tokuzo. It would be well to have a funeral service held. So
the memorial service for Tokuzo was conducted at the family temple of
Tsutayoshi. The figure was never again seen. Kikugoro[u] in the rôle of
ghost of the _wakato[u]_ Kohei came out dressed in a grey robe marked
with _kokumochi_ (the badge of the white disk figured on coloured
ground). Before one's very eyes he changed to O'Iwa. As ghost and
arrayed in the family crest it was restricted to the Kohei of the
"Yotsuya Kwaidan." The theatre was packed. Such was the crowd that the
upper gallery of the theatre collapsed. Even though an actor, everywhere
he (Kikugoro[u]) was spoken of as a great man. To favoured guests of
Kikugoro[u] the matter was so related. Thus the tale is a true one.


TAKUAN

Three great priests of influence figure in the rule of the first three
Tokugawa Sho[u]gun. Tenhai Osho[u] of the Nankwo[u]bo[u], bishop of the
temple foundation at Ueno, was all powerful under Iyeyasu. His
successors, Nikkei So[u]zu of the San-en-Zo[u]jo[u]ji at Shiba, and
Takuan Zaisho[u] of the Daikokudo[u], the To[u]kaiji of Shinagawa, were
the priestly influences under the 2nd and 3rd Sho[u]gun. It is the
last-named cleric who is responsible for the hard and palatable yellow
preparation of the _daikon_ (radish) known under his name of _takuan_.
The _daikon_ is soused in brine and rice bran, kept weighted down under
heavy stones, and allowed "to ripen" for some weeks. A way station in
its preparation and edibility, and to be experienced in every Japanese
household, is the unspeakable and unbreathable soft _nukamisozuké_. Its
presence always arouses suspicion of the pressing defect in the house
drainage.

Takuan deserves esteem and appreciation for other than culinary
reasons. On a visit to the castle one day the old friar noted the
depression of his valued and intimate friend Yagyu Tajima no Kami. The
aging _o[u]metsuké_ (suzerain's eye) and fencing teacher to the third
Sho[u]gun opened out his woes. His second son was dead. His third son
was worthless. At least the father thought so at this time. His eldest
son, Jubei, as great at arms as himself and his legitimate successor,
was a madman--gone mad over his own excellence. Takuan heard the
particulars. At once he volunteered to act as physician. "Be of good
heart. This Takuan will prescribe." The grateful Munenori, in the course
of the next few days sent to the prelate's quarters to know when the
journey to the far-off Yamato fief would be made. He would make
provision for the prior's comfort and conveyance. Said a sleek scribe
and substitute--"The lord abbot has long since departed. It is useless
to attempt to overtake him. He travels fast." Such was the message to
the pleased but discomfited Munenori. Meanwhile at Yagyu Masakizaka in
Yamato there turned up a shabby travel-stained old fellow. The
gatekeepers were inclined flatly to refuse admission. However, the
_karo[u]_, or chief officer of the fief, had to be notified. He was
unwilling to let slip any chance of relief to the condition of Jubei
Dono. With some misgivings the old fellow was ordered around to the
garden. The _samurai_ code made little account of cutting down a
retainer, a beggar, or an outcast. In the first case compensation was
allowed; the last two were honoured by the experiment. Priests and women
were not covered by the code; matter of omission, rather than of
importance. The wanderer had taken his seat by the little pond in the
garden. Here to all appearance he remained in a meditation which was
roughly interrupted by the irruption of the lord of the mansion into a
room close by. Jubei kicked the _sho[u]ji_ out of the frames, and strode
to the edge of the verandah. His hair was in wild disorder. He wore
armour on his shoulders, and was stark naked below the waist. Face
twitching and eyes flashing he hailed his visitor, to demand on what
mission he had dared to intrude on the time and patience of the great
man. Let the excuse be a good one. Otherwise--But at abuse the cleric
was a good hand himself. He, too, had heard of Jubei Dono; he who posed
as the great man of Nippon. This was poaching on his own ground, for he
set himself up to be the match of any number in the land. At this Jubei
broke into angry jeers and invectives. The priest made answer with equal
roughness. "How face two opponents--to right and left?" Jubei snorted
with contempt. He was active enough to neglect the one and cut down the
other before aid could be brought. The Yagyu-ryu[u], or style of
fencing, made provision for such occasion. Aye! And for four--and
against eight.... "And against sixteen, and thirty-two, and sixty-four,
and a hundred and twenty-eight opponents ... against all the many
fighting men of Nippon? How would Jubei face all those?" To this Jubei
could but answer that he would die fighting. The priest in his turn
snorted with contempt. "Die fighting: by such words Jubei admits
defeat." But he did not allow Jubei to turn questioner in his turn.
Swiftly he shifted the argument. He, the cleric, considered Jubei of
small account. He would prove to him what a fool he was by the
interpretation of a mere thirty-one syllables of poetry. This should be
the test of intelligence. The Knight's Way (Budo[u]) had its inner and
cryptic meaning expressed in verse. So had the Way of the Buddha
(Butsudo[u]). Of this latter Jubei knew nothing; and he doubted if he
knew anything of the former. At least let him display some sample of his
wit. Jubei leaped at the test to prove his greatness. Now he scorned to
deal with a priest in arms. How was this:

    "By night storm of Narutaki broken,
     The scattered jewels, e'en the moon, it harbours."[50]

"Is there but that to prove wit?"--"How then with this one?"

    "Tree leaves on Yamakawa's flood:
     The self, abandoned, does but drift--lo!"[51]

The priest threw up his hands. "Such stuff will never do! And this
fellow considers himself educated!"

    "Rain seen, impeded not to flow away;
     The snow breaks not the stem of willow green."[52]

    "Various and many though the ways of teaching be,
     There is but one true stroke of sword."[53]

Jubei gleamed most homicidally at his questioner. The priest only
said--"A child has such by heart." And Jubei knew 'twas so, and was
rebuked. Now he was in less haste:

    "The heart, how judge it?
     An ink sketch of the breeze amid the pines."[54]

A shrug of the shoulders was the reward of this effort.

    "Though barrier mount, the leafy mount, the inner mount, be dense
                    with leafage;
     What e'er one wills, naught hinders."[55]

The priest shook his head as with grave indulgence to childhood's
thoughts. Jubei burst into a rage. He turned to his sword-bearer, and
laid hand on the weapon. The lad knelt with bowed head, uncertain
whether the sword was to fall on himself or the visitor. Without paying
the slightest attention to the hostile attitude the priest cut matters
short. "Jubei Dono would question the priest's right to judge. Come now!
The cleric's foolish head against the wits of Nippon's great man. O
warrior, interpret!" A sign; and ink stone and poem paper (_tanzaku_)
were put before him. Jubei in turn took the scroll in hand. He read:

    "_Tatazumuna, yukuna, modoruna, isuwaruna;
     Neruna, okiruna, shiru mo shiranu mo._"

    "It neither stands still, nor goes forward, nor goes backward,
                    nor remains as it is;
     It sleeps not, rises not: known or unknown."

Jubei started with a bellow; and ended in a whisper. The retainers
looked in each other's faces. Who was the maddest--their lord or the
shabby _bo[u]zu_? A long silence followed. Jubei no longer stood in
grandiloquent pose. He squatted down before the ideographs. At last he
said--"The poem contains much matter. Deign to allow time for the
solution." His voice was gentle and courteous to this future victim of
his intelligence. The priest nodded a genial assent. Before he withdrew
Jubei gave emphatic orders as to ward and entertainment. The pleasures
of anticipation, of solution of the poem and slicing of the cleric, must
have compensation. His tread was slow and stately as he left the room;
his looks were contained and thoughtful. The man of black robe was
carried off to a better reception than so far experienced. With scorn he
sent away the scanty meal of vegetable food; and ordered matters to his
taste with a manner that none cared to obey, or dared to disobey.

Meanwhile Jubei started in on the poem. With the progress of his
efforts ideas of his greatness disappeared. No matter what might be his
skill with the sword--and the priest already had shown its
limitations--his inexperience in literature was patent. Ah! If he could
but win the head of this scurvy cleric. His mind now was totally removed
from thoughts of himself. For two days and two nights he never closed
his eyes, which were fastened on the infernal ideographs--palpably so
full of a meaning he could not grasp. Then he was worn out. He went to
sleep, and slept for a full twenty-four hours. On awaking he was a
different being. The cobwebs of the mind were clean swept. Its vague
shiftings had been brought to concentration--to thought. Now it was the
household which was mad with joy. It was Jubei, lord of the manor, who
sought interview with his saviour. Prostrate he gave thanks, apology for
the poor entertainment; and expressed his hope and wish to keep always
by him the holy man. Who was he--this man who had given him back mind
and power of thought? Just then a messenger from his father, Tajima no
Kami, was announced. Those assembled leaned forward at sight of the man
in amazed prostration, first before his lord, then before the shabby old
priest. "Takuan Osho[u] Sama at Yagyu! And yet this Kyu[u]taro[u] has
made all speed to Yamato to make report of his lordship's coming." All
fell on their faces, including Jubei. Takuan smiled, a little grimly.
"The garb makes not the cleric. Jubei Dono will forgive the presence of
the humble priest who now must leave him, pressed by affairs, none of
which have been more important than the mission here." And leave he
did--but ample gifts to the temple followed after. Jubei never could
take his father's place close to the Sho[u]gun's side. His one-time
madness forbade assumption of such office. Indeed on rare occasions the
mad fit again would threaten; but the infallible remedy was at hand. To
Jubei's question Takuan had answered--"The meaning? The poem has none.
If there had been verily Takuan would have lost his head. But find one,
if you can." The joy of Tajima no Kami was completed by the return of
his third son Matajuro[u], restored to normal health. Later this
Matajuro[u] became the famous Hida no Kami and successor to his father
as the Sho[u]gun's fencing master. Of these three men--more anon.[56]

FOOTNOTES:

[1] _Kwaidan_ means "Wonder Tale." The word is of general meaning,
requiring limitation for the specific case.

[2] The _go-kenin_, for the most part; although some _hatamoto_, whose
incomes ran as low as 300 _koku_ could be classed with them. In
English--cf. T.H. Gubbins--Trans. Asiatic Soc. of Japan, xv.

[3] The hard palatable pickled yellow _daikon_ (radish). _Nukamisozuké_
is a way station in its production by pickling in salt and bran.
_Nukamisozuké_ is better described than smelt.

[4] Sanzu no Kawa--the river crossed by the dead; the Buddhist "Styx."
Shide no Yama--the mountain to be crossed on the way to Hell, or to the
judgment hall of its great king--Emma Dai-o[u] (Yama). All deserve, and
get, some punishment in this nether world.

[5] Near Meguro: scores of quaint figures, seated in tiers and
meditation.

[6] A famous Chinese book on military tactics. Prince Yoshitsuné, hero
of the Gempei wars, served arduously for a glimpse of it. Cf.: Life of
Benkei, vol. i, pp. 311 reg. Densuké refers to the three (_san_) stages
of rice cooking.

[7] Geishu[u]-Aki province. For six months the _daimyo[u]_ left Edo to
govern their fief in person. Their wives and families remained in Edo.
The penalties at the barriers (Hakoné, for instance) were severe if the
wife tried to get away (escape) from Edo.

[8] The Japanese personal pronoun is used--in the first person only to
obviate ambiguity in the sentence. Women use it more frequently than
men. In the second person it is used to express emphasis, great
familiarity, impertinence, or rebuke. The last two uses are frequent.
Ordinarily the honorifics and the construction of the sentence take the
place of these pronouns. Such at least seems to be the usage of the
_ko[u]dan_ writers, and in the present book the example has been
followed, as far as possible. In a few instances the use of a pronoun
will relieve the strain of a lengthy sentence or involved circumlocution
in the western tongue. At times the closer style can be abandoned--as in
the direct narration of the Tale of the Baryufu Kwannon. So also with
the translations of the _gidayu_ and the _ko[u]dan_ attached. These are
for recitation. In the original the pronoun is rarely written in. But
the literal translation of the honorifics would appear stilted. To
westerners these are appellations; to the native they are indications.

[9] The old Shimbashi station and its yards cover this site. "Tide
limit"--a suggestive name.

[10] A _sakuji bugyo[u]_ was the official who had charge of the
maintenance and construction of public works within the _daimyo[u]'s_
fief.

[11] A deep cutting through the hill. They are common features in
Nippon. Many valleys are only accessible by a climb, unless mitigated by
a _kirido[u]shi_, or obviated by a tunnel. Kamakura, for instance, is
accessible by land in no other way. Asahina _kirido[u]shi_: there are
several others.

[12] The description is curious. Writing fifty years ago Ryuo[u] tells
us these men no longer practised. His book is not readily met with and
the passage in the original is worth preserving--"_Kono sunegiri yatsu
to iu wa tadaima de wa arimasen ga; makurajima no tabi ni asaura wo
haki, sankeigyo[u] no kyahan de, nagai no wo ippon sashi. Eh! To[u] de o
isogi de nai. Okata wa watakushi no mosu koyaku no ko[u]no[u] wo kiite o
motome nasai. Nukeba tamachiru nagai no yaiba da nure kami de mo kayo ni
kireru, tadaima yatsu ga wo kiri chi wo tomete goran ni ireru; to maru
de kiru yo[u] desu ga ha (yaiba) no aru tokoro wa madzu no kata bakari
de, moto no kata wa yaiba ga hiite aru yue, sono ha hiku no tokoro wo
ude he ataru to suji ga tsuku bakari de kire washimasen ga, tanka ga
kireru kara, chiwa taki-tsu se no gotoku nagareru. Chi ni wa sakarawazu
ikusa naka ko wo mochiireba, sokuza ni todomaru nani mae kara todotteru
no desu ga, hagyu[u] da kara maru de chi ga tomaru yo[u] ni micru kara,
kono ho he hitotsu gai, kono ho he futatsu gai, to uremasu._"--"Yotsuya
Kwaidan," pp. 31-32.

[13] One-fourth of a _ryo[u]_ = 15 silver mommé = 872 grains Troy. Money
had much greater purchasing value at that time as compared with the
present days; perhaps 20 times, but adulteration of the coinage caused
great variations.

[14] The Machibugyo[u] was judge and prosecutor (procurator or district
attorney); the two offices being held by the same man. A court trial
included both functions. _Tengu_, used below, is the long-nosed wood
bogey. There is a note in Benkei, i, 260.

[15] The _tawara_ equals two-fifths of a _koku_. At present-day figures
the stipend of Tamiya can be put at about 2000 yen; that of Ito[u]
Kwaiba, mentioned later, at 13,000 yen. The great _daimyo[u]_ with
incomes running into the hundreds of thousands of _koku_ were princes
administering part of the public domain, with armies and an elaborate
civil service to support. Even a _hatamoto_ (minor _daimyo[u]_,
immediate vassals of the sho[u]gun) of 10,000 _koku_, such as Yagyu[u]
Tajima no Kami had a large train at his Edo _yashiki_ and at his fief.
The Daté House of Sendai, or the Maeda of Kaga, Etchu[u], and Echizen,
are examples of the greater To[u]zama, or lords independent in the
administration of their fiefs. Labour, it is to be added, was cheap
compared to food values. Taxes were heavy--ranging from 30 to 70 per
cent. The middleman took his high fee. Yet sumptuary laws were necessary
to prevent extravagance among the farming class. Some of them were rich
men, especially in the better administered Tokugawa fiefs. The public
works required of the _daimyo[u]_--especially the To[u]zama--prevented a
dangerous accumulation of resources, and sometimes almost ruined his
subjects. Accurate measurements of income are not available. The _koku_
of _daimyo[u]_ income has been placed as high as ten bushels. The
present-day _koku_ equals 5.13 bushels. The price of rice ranges between
15-20 yen per _koku_.

[16] The title for all men of learning and professional attainments. The
great medical doctor is "Sensei," the doctor of literature is
"Sensei"--and the charlatan who peddles charms by the highway is
"Sensei"--teacher.

[17] A technical social expression--"I trouble you" or "with highest
respect and consideration." Satuma = Satsuma-Jo[u]fu, the grass cloth of
fine quality woven and dyed in Loo-choo; narrow swords; all this
(Momogawa) is an example of the earnest study the _ko[u]dan_ lecturers
make of their subject. These delightful little expositions of dress and
manner are frequent.

[18] _Rusu_ or _rusuban_ = caretaker in the owner's absence. As often as
not the wife is so regarded by the Japanese husband.

[19] Reiganji, the great temple giving the name to the Reigan district
of Fukagawa, is one of the many temples there found. The Jo[u]shinji is
close by.

[20] A complicated checkers-chess like game.

[21] There are nine of these stages of skill.

[22] 5.13 bushel. Income of the _samurai_ classes were so measured.

[23] _Kyara_ = nut gall, in Momogawa's _ko[u]dan_. From the marriage to
the expulsion of O'Iwa his treatment of the story is mainly followed.
Ryuo[u] slurs the marriage, but describes the persecution with great
effect. The lines of treatment only diverge subsequently. Ryuo[u] is to
be preferred.

[24] The monetary _bu_ was one-fourth the _ryo[u]_; the _shu[u]_ was
one-fourth the value of the _bu_. A hundred _mon_ = one _sen_. To-day
there are blind shampooers (and for massage) at 500 _mon_ = 5 _sen_.

[25] Of the Nichiren sect. The characters of the "Yotsuya Kwaidan" move
within the circle of this Presbyterian cult: _i.e._, Presbyterian in its
stiff attitude of hostility and superiority to all other sects. There is
another Myo[u]gyo[u]ji, neighbour to the Ten-o[u] shrine.

[26] High sounding titles given to the _great hetairae_. The difference
from the Greek world lay in their not being independent. They were
confined to the houses of their owners. But these noted women were
ransomed at times--even by great nobles. Thus Daté Tsunamune the 3rd
_daimyo[u]_ of Sendai bought the famous Oiran Takao, weighing in the
scales the woman against gold. In a fit of passion he killed her soon
after, and had her body cast into the Edogawa.

[27] "_Hagurete mo mata afu michi ya hana no yama._"

[28] The _aodaisho[u]_ is something of the nature of a black snake. Says
Brinkley's Dict. "_elaphis virgatus_."

[29] The term "Inkyo[u]," already several times used, applies to a man
who has retired from active life, leaving the management of the affairs
of the House to the duly appointed heir and successor. A specified
portion of the income is usually assigned for his maintenance, and forms
a first lien, so to speak, on such return. The modernized law of Nippon
does not permit assumption of this state before the age of fifty years,
unless there be incapacitation such as necessitates retirement. In
ancient days (pre-Meiji) there was no such limitation. Men often retired
very early in life--from caprice, family intrigue, or for the freer
management of their affairs. In the latter case they had more power and
less responsibility; the latter falling on the heir and successor,
perhaps still a mere child. _Go_ is merely honorific.

[30] "Awarase ya: Byo[u]bu wa koi no taki sagari." The living carp
strives to ascend the fall.

[31] The old hag who lurks in the River of Souls, waylaying little
children, robbing them of their clothes, and compelling them to
construct huge piles of stones. Her counterfeit presentment (by Unkei)
can be well seen at the Enno[u]ji of Kamakura.

[32] An ordinary disposition of these women; who often preferred their
Edo lover to such lot.

[33] _Ototoi oidé_: It is the salutation of the good Buddhist to the
captured insect, thrown without and requested to return "the day before
yesterday" = the Greek Kalends. As used above it is a gross insult to
the person addressed.

[34] Damask hill: the names taken by these great _hetairai_ were most
fanciful.

[35] Next to the Ten-o[u] Jinja; not that of Samégabashi. To-day
retired, neat and clean; without the dirty publicity of larger temples.
It is a bit of country in crowded Yotsuya.

[36] A young girl's method of fixing the hair; but Ryuo[u] uses the
term. Gohei are the paper strips used as offering. Usually attached to a
short stick.

[37] At the Gyo[u]ranji of Matsuzakacho[u] in the Mita district of
To[u]kyo[u].

[38] _Sanzugawa_: _Yama_ mo nakereba, _hashi mo nashi_; _shinde no
tabiji hana wa nao nashi_. Sanzugawa, the river crossed by the dead.

[39] A fourth form of torture was suspension--an exaggerated infliction
of "the lobster." These official forms are described by J. Carey Hall in
the transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan, vol. XLI., Part V. The
native references are the "Tokugawa Seikei Shiryo[u]," "Keizai Dai
Hiroku," "Ko[u]jiki Ruihi Horitsu-bu." Cf. article on Go[u]mon in the
"Kokushi Dai Jiten." There were other forms. In the examination into the
famous conspiracy of Yui Sho[u]setsu (1651 A.D.) no confession could be
secured from Yoshida Hatsuémon. He was brought out, to find his
thirteen-year-old son Hachitaro[u] undergoing the torture of dropping
water. At the last extremities the boy pleaded for mercy. His father
drily told him to act the _samurai_, and not to imperil the lives of
others. It was different with Matsubayashi Chuya (really the last heir
of the famous Cho[u]sokabé House of Tosa). At sight of his old, white
haired, white faced, jail wearied mother threatened with the fire
torture, he did for her what he would not do for himself. The old woman
willingly would have undergone the torture. Chuya's confession cost the
lives of seventy-five men.

[40] Hifumikwan (To[u]kyo[u]), Meiji 29th year 2nd month 15th day (28th
March, 1896).

[41] _Mairase So[u]ro[u]_: "I take the liberty of...." Brinkley's Dict.
A purely formal expression used in the letters of women writers.

[42] The three holy things--Buddha, his Law, the priesthood.

[43] Another reading of the characters for Kikugoro[u]--to the
initiated.

[44] "Top-bottom": the beautiful lozenge shaped [=X] dress of the
_samurai_ when on court service, or for other ceremony: full dress.

[45] "Small fish boiled in soy in order to preserve it (named after
Tsukudajima-To[u]kyo[u]--famous for its preparation)."--Brinkley's Dict.

[46] Brown, with stripes--a favourite pattern with men and women.

[47] Feast of the Dead. This festival is held in July--in the country in
August, the old calendar seventh month.

[48] Apparitional divine lord.

[49] The expression is technical--"_hitoban de mo o cha wo hikeba_." All
night a mere tea-server.

[50]

    [Narutaki no yoru no arashi ni kudakarete;
     Chiru tama goto ni tsuki zo yadoreru.]

[51]

    [Yamakawa no nagare ni ko no ha shizumu tomo;
     Mi wo sutete koso ukabu se mo are.]

[52]

    [Furu to miba tsumoranu saki ni haraekashi;
     Yuki ni wa orenu aoyagi no ito.]^{[3]}

[53]

    [Sama Sama to oshie no michi mo o[u]keredo
     Uchikomu tokoro shin no itto[u].]^{[4]}

[54]

    [Kokoro to wa ikanaru mono wo iu yaran;
     Sumie ni kakitsu matsu kaze no oto.]^{[5]}

[55]

    [Tsukubayama, Hayama, Nakayama, Shigeredomo;
     Omoiru ni wa mono mo sawarazu.]^{[6]}

[56] Cf.--"Araki Mataémon--Ueno Adauchi," by Masui Nanzan. There is
little reason to believe that Jubei's madness was assumed, a rather
extravagant explanation of the more than probable fact that his
well-known travels were inspired by the Sho[u]gun's government. Actual
knowledge and inspection of the conditions and feelings in far-off
Satsuma, made by an expert, was much desired. Okubo Hikozaémon also
travelled as the Sho[u]gun's private eye. Jubei undoubtedly found his
reputation for one-time madness very useful, and played upon it.

       *       *       *       *       *

  +------------------------------------------------------------+
  | Typographical errors corrected in text:                    |
  |                                                            |
  | Page 27: nukamisosuké amended to nukamisozuké              |
  | Page 54: aids amended to aides                             |
  | Page 55, pages 58-61 inclusive: Sakarai amended to Sakurai |
  | Page 61: T[=o]eman amended to Toémon                       |
  | Page 104: Nakusuké amended to Kakusuké                     |
  | Page 143: misintrepeted amended to misinterpreted          |
  | Page 144: aids amended to aides                            |
  | Page 172: honorofic amended to honorific                   |
  | Page 173: Kamikura amended to Kamimura                     |
  | Page 175: trucculent amended to truculent                  |
  | Page 187: Samegebashi amended to Samégabashi               |
  | Page 193: Akiyima amended to Akiyama                       |
  | Page 194: Teremachi amended to Teramachi                   |
  | Page 198: Fukotar[=o] amended to Fukutar[=o]               |
  | Page 223: Sh[=o]zaémon amended to Ch[=o]zaémon             |
  | Page 227: peel amended to peal                             |
  | Page 240: Kamikura amended to Kamimura                     |
  | Page 262: Okusuma amended to Okusama                       |
  | Page 269: gray amended to grey (twice)                     |
  | Page 273: threshhold amended to threshold                  |
  | Page 277: Iye amended to Iya                               |
  | Page 279: Mikowaya amended to Mikawaya                     |
  |                                                            |
  | Where there is an equal number of instances of a word      |
  | occurring as hyphenated and unhyphenated, the hyphens      |
  | have been retained: Blind-man/Blindman;                    |
  | care-taker/caretaker; cross-roads/crossroads;              |
  | go-down/godown; house-keeping/housekeeping;                |
  | Mita-mura/Mitamura; near-by/nearby; woman-kind/womankind.  |
  |                                                            |
  +------------------------------------------------------------+

       *       *       *       *       *





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Yotsuya Kwaidan or O'Iwa Inari, by 
James S. De Benneville

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE YOTSUYA KWAIDAN OR O'IWA INARI ***

***** This file should be named 19944-8.txt or 19944-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/9/9/4/19944/

Produced by Clare Boothby and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
